The  muscles  of  the  arm  are:

Coracobrachialis.  Brachialis.

Biceps  brachii.  Triceps  brachii.

Brachial  Fascia  (fascia  brachii;  deep  fascia  of  the  arm) . — The  brachial  fascia  is
continuous  with  that  covering  the  Deltoideus  and  the  Pectoralis  major,  by  means
of  which  it  is  attached,  above,  to  the  clavicle,  acromion,  and  spine  of  the  scapula;
it  forms  a  thin,  loose,  membranous  sheath  for  the  muscles  of  the  arm,  and  sends
septa  between  them ;  it  is  composed  of  fibers  disposed  in  a  circular  or  spiral  direc-
tion, and  connected  together  by  vertical  and  oblique  fibers.  It  differs  in  thickness
at  different  parts,  being  thin  over  the  Biceps  brachii,  but  thicker  where  it  covers
the  Triceps  brachii,  and  over  the  epicondyles  of  the  humerus:  it  is  strengthened
by  fibrous  aponeuroses,  derived  from  the  Pectoralis  major  and  Latissimus  dorsi
medially,  and  from  the  Deltoideus  laterally.  On  either  side  it  gives  off  a  strong
intermuscular  septum,  which  is  attached  to  the  corresponding  supracondylar
ridge  and  epicondyle  of  the  humerus.  The  lateral  intermuscular  septmn  extends
from  the  lower  part  of  the  crest  of  the  greater  tubercle,  along  the  lateral  supra-
condylar ridge,  to  the  lateral  epicondyle;  it  is  blended  with  the  tendon  of  the  Del-
toideus, gives  attachment  to  the  Triceps  brachii  behind,  to  the  Brachialis,  Brachio-
radialis,  and  Extensor  carpi  radialis  longus  in  front,  and  is  perforated  by  the  radial
nerve  and  profunda  branch  of  the  brachial  artery.  The  medial  intermuscular
septum,  thicker  than  the  preceding,  extends  from  the  lower  part  of  the  crest  of
the  lesser  tubercle  of  the  humerus  below  the  Teres  major,  along  the  medial  supra-
condylar ridge  to  the  medial  epicondyle;  it  is  blended  with  the  tendon  of  the
Coracobrachialis,  and  affords  attachment  to  the  Triceps  brachii  behind  and  the
Brachialis  in  front.  It  is  perforated  by  the  ulnar  nerve,  the  superior  ulnar
collateral  artery,  and  the  posterior  branch  of  the  inferior  ulnar  collateral  artery.
At  the  elbow,  the  deep  fascia  is  attached  to  the  epicondyles  of  the  humerus  and
the  olecranon  of  the  ulna,  and  is  continuous  with  the  deep  fascia  of  the  forearm.


THE  MUSCLES  AND  FASCIA  OF  THE  ARM


443


Tust  below  the  middle  of  the  arm,  on  its  medial  side,  is  an  oval  opening  in  the  deep
fascia,  which  transmits  the  basilic  vein  and  some  lymphatic  vessels.

The  Coracobrachialis  (Fig.  411),  the  smallest  of  the  three  muscles  in  this  region,
is  situated  at  the  upper  and  medial  part  of  the  arm.  It  arises  from  the  apex  of
the  coracoid  process,  in  common  with  the  short  head  of  the  Biceps  brachii,  and  from
the  intermuscular  septum  between  the  two  muscles ;  it  is  inserted  by  means  of  a  flat
tendon  into  an  impression  at  the  middle  of  the  medial  surface  and  border  of  the
body  of  the  humerus  between  the  origins  of  the  Triceps  brachii  and  Brachialis.
lit  is  perforated  by  the  musculocutaneous  nerve.


Biceps  brachii  M


Cephalic  vein-.


Brachialis 'M.


Radial  nerve-
Dorsal  antihrachial,
cutaneous  nerve

Radial  collateral  arteri/

Lateral  intermuscular
septum  of  humerus


Lateral  antibrachial
cutaneous  nerve

Brachial  artery  and  veins

Median  nerve

^Medial  antibrachial
V   cutaneous  nerve
l^  ^'-Basilic  vein
.    >,..  Ulnar  nerve


Superior  ulnar
collateral  artery


Medial  intermuscular
septum  of  humerus


-Humerus


''Triceps  brachii  M.


Fig.  413. — Cross-section  through  the  middle  of  upper  arm.      (Eycleshymer  and  Schoemaker.O

Variations. — A  bony  head  may  reach  the  medial  epicondyle;  a  short  head  more  rarely  foimd
ly  insert  into  the  lesser  tubercle.

The  Biceps  brachii  {Biceps;  Biceps  flexor  cuhiti)  (Fig.  411)  is  a  long  fusiform
muscle,  placed  on  the  front  of  the  arm,  and  arising  by  two  heads,  from  which
circumstance  it  has  received  its  name.  The  short  head  arises  by  a  thick  flattened
tendon  from  the  apex  of  the  coracoid  process,  in  common  with  the  Coracobrachialis.
The  long  head  arises  from  the  supraglenoid  tuberosity  at  the  upper  margin  of  the
glenoid  cavity,  and  is  continuous  with  the  glenoidal  labrum.  This  tendon,  enclosed
,in  a  special  sheath  of  the  synovial  membrane  of  the  shoulder-joint,  arches  over
the  head  of  the  humerus;  it  emerges  from  the  capsule  through  an  opening  close
to  the  humeral  attachment  of  the  ligament,  and  descends  in  the  intertubercular
groove;  it  is  retained  in  the  groove  by  the  transverse  humeral  ligament  and  by  a
fibrous  prolongation  from  the  tendon  of  the  Pectoralis  major.  Each  tendon  is
succeeded  by  an  elongated  muscular  belly,  and  the  two  bellies,  although  closely
applied  to  each  other,  can  readily  be  separated  until  within  about  7.5  cm.  of  the
elbow-joint.  Here  they  end  in  a  flattened  tendon,  which  is  inserted  into  the  rough
posterior  portion  of  the  tuberosity  of  the  radius,  a  bursa  being  interposed  between
the  tendon  and  the  front  part  of  the  tuberosity.  As  the  tendon  of  the  muscle
approaches  the  radius  it  is  twisted  upon  itself,  so  that  its  anterior  surface  becomes


1  A  Cross-section  Anatomy,  New  York,   1911.


444  ^^MAMJa^^       MYOLOGY


lateral  and  is  applied  to  the  tuberosity  of  the  radius  at  its  insertion.    Opposrte
the  bend  of  the  elbow  the  tendon  gives  off,  from  its  medial  side,  a  broad  aponeu-
rosis, the  lacertus  fibrosus  (bicipital  fascia)  which  passes  obliquely  downward  and
medial  ward  across  the  brachial  artery,  and  is  continuous  with  the  deep  fascia  j^
covering  the  origins  of  the  Flexor  muscles  of  the  forearm  (Fig.  410).  H

Variations. — A  third  head  (10  per  cent.)  to  the  Biceps  brachii  is  occasionally  found,  arising  at
the  upper  and  medial  part  of  the  Brachialis,  with  the  fibers  of  which  it  is  continuous,  and  inserted
into  the  lacertus  fibrosus  and  medial  side  of  the  tendon  of  the  muscle.  In  most  cases  this  additional
slip  lies  behind  the  brachial  artery  in  its  coarse  down  the  arm.  In  some  instances  the  third  head
consists  of  two  slips,  which  pass  down,  one  in  front  of  and  the  other  behind  the  artery,  concealing
the  vessel  in  the  lower  half  of  the  arm.  More  rarely  a  fourth  head  occurs  arising  from  the  outer
side  of  the  humerus,  from  the  intertubercular  groove,  or  from  the  greater  tubercle.  Other  heads
are  occasionally  found.  Slips  sometimes  pass  from  the  inner  border  of  the  muscle  over  the  brachial
artery  to  the  medial  intermuscular  septum,  or  the  medial  epicondyle;  more  rarely  to  the  Pronator
teres  or  Brachialis.    The  long  head  may  be  absent  or  arise  from  the  intertubercular  groove.

The  Brachialis  (Brachialis  anticus)  (Fig.  411)  covers  the  front- of  the  elbow-joint
and  the  lower  half  of  the  humerus.  It  arises  from  the  lower  half  of  the  front
of  the  humerus,  commencing  above  at  the  insertion  of  the  Deltoideus,  which  it
embraces  by  two  angular  processes.  Its  origin  extends  below  to  within  2.5  cm.
of  the  margin  of  the  articular  surface.  It  also  arises  from  the  intermuscular  septa,
but  more  extensively  from  the  medial. than  the  lateral;  it  is  separated  from  the
lateral  below  by  the  Brachioradialis  and  Extensor  carpi  radialis  longus.  Its  fibers
converge  to  a  thick  tendon,  which  is  inserted  into  the  tuberosity  of  the  ulna  and
the  rough  depression  on  the  anterior  surface  of  the  coronoid  process.

Variations. — Occasionally  doubled;  additional  slips  to  the  Supinator,  Pronator  teres,  Biceps,
lacertus  fibrosus,  or  radius  are  more  rarely  found.

Nerves. — The  Coracobrachialis,  Biceps  brachii  and  Brachialis  are  supplied  by  the  musculo-
cutaneous nerve;  the  Brachiahs  usually  receives  an  additional  filament  from  the  radial.  The
Coracobrachialis  receives  its  supply  primarily  from  the  seventh  cervical,  the  Biceps  brachii  and
Brachialis  from  the  fifth  and  sixth  cervical  nerves.

Actions. — The  CoracobrachiaUs  draws  the  humerus  forward  and  medialward,  and  at  the
same  time  assists  in  retaining  the  head  of  the  bone  in  contact  with  the  glenoid  cavity.  The
Biceps  brachii  is  a  flexor  of  the  elbow  and,  to  a  less  extent,  of  the  shoulder;  it  is  also  a  powerful
supinator,  and  serves  to  render  tense  the  deep  fascia  of  the  forearm  by  means  of  the  lacertus
fibrosus  given  off  from  its  tendon.  The  Brachialis  is  a  flexor  of  the  forearm,  and  forms  an  impor-
tant defence  to  the  elbow-joint.  When  the  forearm  is  fixed,  the  Biceps  brachii  and  Brachialis
flex  the  arm  upon  the  forearm,  as  in  efforts  of  climbing.

The  Triceps  brachii  {Triceps;  Triceps  extensor  cubiti)  (Fig.  412)  is  situated  on
the  back  of  the  arm,  extending  the  entire  length  of  the  dorsal  surface  of  the  humerus.
It  is  of  large  size,  and  arises  by  three  heads  (long,  lateral,  and  medial),  hence  its
name.

The  long  head  arises  by  a  flattened  tendon  from  the  infraglenoid  tuberosity
of  the  scapula,  being  blended  at  its  upper  part  with  the  capsule  of  the  shoulder-
joint;  the  muscular  fibers  pass  downward  between  the  two  other  heads  of  the
muscle,  and  join  with  them  in  the  tendon  of  insertion.

The  lateral  head  arises  from  the  posterior  surface  of  the  body  of  the  humerus,
between  the  insertion  of  the  Teres  minor  and  the  upper  part  of  the  groove  for  the
radial  nerve,  and  from  the  lateral  border  of  the  humerus  and  the  lateral  intermus-
cular septum;  the  fibers  from  this  origin  converge  toward  the  tendon  of  insertion.

The  medial  head  arises  from  the  posterior  surface  of  the  body  of  the  humerus,
below  the  groove  for  the  radial  nerve;  it  is  narrow  and  pointed  above,  and  extends
from  the  insertion  of  the  Teres  major  to  within  2.5  cm.  of  the  trochlea:  it  also
arises  from  the  medial  border  of  the  humerus  and  from  the  back  of  the  whole
length  of  the  medial  intermuscular  septum.  Some  of  the  fibers  are  directed
downward  to  the  olecranon,  while  others  converge  to  the  tendon  of  insertion.

The  tendon  of  the  Triceps  brachii  begins  about  the  middle  of  the  muscle:  it  con-


THE  Vi


jAR


:m


m

I

II


sists  of  two  aponeurotic  laminae,  one  of  which  is  subcutaneous  and  covers  the  back
of  the  lower  half  of  the  muscle;  the  other  is  more  deeply  seated  in  the  substance
of  the  muscle.  After  receiving  the  attachment  of  the  muscular  fibers,  the  two
lamellae  join  together  above  the  elbow,  and  are  inserted,  for  the  most  part,  into
the  posterior  portion  of  the  upper  surface  of  the  olecranon;  a  band  of  fibers  is,
however,  continued  downward,  on  the  lateral  side,  over  the  Anconseus,  to  blend
with  the  deep  fascia  of  the  forearm.

The  long  head  of  the  Triceps  brachii  descends  between  the  Teres  minor  and  Teres  major,
dividing  the  triangular  space  between  these  two  muscles  and  the  humerus  into  two  smaller  spaces,
one  triangular,  the  other  quadrangular  (Fig.  412).  The  triangular  space  contains  the  scapular
circumflex  vessels;  it  is  bounded  by  the  Teres  minor  above,  the  Teres  major  below,  and  the
scapular  head  of  the  Triceps  laterally.  The  quadrangular  space  transmits  the  posterior  humeral
circumflex  vessels  and  the  axillary  nerve;  it  is  bounded  by  the  Teres  minor  and  capsule  of  the
ehoulder-joint  above,  the  Teres  major  below,  the  long  head  of  the  Triceps  brachii  medially,  and
the  humerus  laterally.

Variations. — A  fourth  head  from  the  inner  part  of  the  humerus;  a  slip  between  Triceps  and
Latissimus  dorsi  corresponding  to  the  Dorso-epitrochlearis.

The  Subanconaeus  is  the  name  given  to  a  few  fibers  which  spring  from  the  deep  surface  of
the  lower  part  of  the  Triceps  brachii,  and  are  inserted  into  the  posterior  Ugament  and  synovial
membrane  of  the  elbow-joint.

Nerves. — The  Triceps  brachii  is  supplied  by  the  seventh  and  eighth  cervical  nerves  through
the  radial  nerve.

Actions. — The  Triceps  brachii  is  the  great  extensor  muscle  of  the  forearm,  and  is  the  direct
antagonist  of  the  Biceps  brachii  and  Brachialis.  When  the  arm  is  extended,  the  long  head  of
the  muscle  may  assist  the  Teres  major  and  Latissimus  dorsi  in  drawing  the  humerus  backward
and  in  adducting  it  to  the  thorax.  The  long  head  supports  the  under  part  of  the  shoulder-joint.
The  Subanconseus  draws  up  the  synovial  membrane  of  the  elbow-joint  during  extension  of  the
forearm.
