joint,  or  the  fascia  of  the  leg.    The  muscle  may  be  absent. 

The  Quadriceps  femoris  (Quadriceps  extensor)  includes  the  four  remaining 
muscles  on  the  front  of  the  thigh.  It  is  the  great  extensor  muscle  of  the  leg,  forming 
a  large  fleshy  mass  which  covers  the  front  and  sides  of  the  femur.  It  is  subdivided 
into  separate  portions,  which  have  received  distinctive  names.  One  occupying 
the  middle  of  the  thigh,  and  connected  above  with  the  ilium,  is  called  from  its 
straight  course  the  Rectus  femoris.  The  other  three  lie  in  immediate  connection 
with  the  body  of  the  femur,  which  they  cover  from  the  trochanters  to  the  condyles. 
The  portion  on  the  lateral  side  of  the  femur  is  termed  the  Vastus  lateralis;  that 
covering  the  medial  side,  the  Vastus  medialis ;  and  that  in  front,  the  Vastus 
intermedius. 

The  Rectus  femoris  is  situated  in  the  middle  of  the  front  of  the  thigh;  it  is  fusi- 
form in  shape,  and  its  superficial  fibers  are  arranged  in  a  bipenniform  manner, 
the  deep  fibers  running  straight  down  to  the  deep  aponeurosis.  It  arises  by  two 
tendons:  one,  the  anterior  or  straight,  from  the  anterior  inferior  iliac  spine;  the 
other,  the  posterior  or  reflected,  fro;n  a  groove  above  the  brim  of  the  acetabulum. 
The  two  unite  at  an  acute  angle,  and  spread  into  an  aponeurosis  which  is  prolonged 
downward  on  the  anterior  surface  of  the  muscle,  and  from  this  the  muscular  flbers 
arise.  The  muscle  ends  in  a  broad  and  thick  aponeurosis  which  occupies  the  lower 
two-thirds  of  its  posterior  surface,  and,  gradually  becoming  narrowed  into  a  flat- 
tened tendon,  is  inserted  into  the  base  of  the  patella. 

The  Vastus  lateralis  (Vastus  externus)  is  the  largest  part  of  the  Quadriceps 
femoris.  It  arises  by  a  broad  aponeurosis,  which  is  attached  to  the  upper  part  of 
the  intertrochanteric  line,  to  the  anterior  and  inferior  borders  of  the  greater  tro- 
chanter, to  the  lateral  lip  of  the  gluteal  tuberosity,  and  to  the  upper  half  of  the 
lateral  lip  of  the  linea  aspera;  this  aponeurosis  covers  the  upper  three-fourths  of 
the  muscle,  and  from  its  deep  surface  many  fibers  take  origin.  A  few  additional 
fibers  arise  from  the  tendon  of  the  Gluta^us  maximus,  and  from  the  lateral  inter- 
muscular septum  between  the  Vastus  lateralis  and  short  head  of  the  Biceps  femoris. 
The  fibers  form  a  large  fleshy  mass,  which  is  attached  to  a  strong  aponeurosis, 
placed  on  the  deep  surface  of  the  lower  part  of  the  muscle:  this  aponeurosis  becomes 


41 


THE  MEDIAL  FEMORAL  MUSCLES  471 


^B I  contracted  and  thickened  into  a  flat  tendon  inserted  into  the  lateral  border  of  the 
patella,  blending  with  the  Quadriceps  femoris  tendon,  and  giving  an  expansion  to 
the  capsule  of  the  knee-joint. 

■I     The  Vastus  medialis  and  Vastus  intermedins  appear  to  be  inseparably  united, 
but  when  the  Rectus  femoris  has  been  reflected  a  narrow  interval  will  be  observed 
extending  upward  from  the  medial  border  of  the  patella  between  the  two  muscles, 
and  the  separation  may  be  continued  as  far  as  the  lower  part  of  the  intertrochan- 
teric line,  where,  however,  the  two  muscles  are  frequently  continuous. 
■I     The  Vastus  medialis  {VaMus  internus)  arises  from  the  lower  half  of  the  inter- 
"  trochanteric  line,  the  medial  lip  of  the  linea  aspera,  the  upper  part  of  the  medial 
supracondylar  line,  the  tendons  of  the  Adductor  longus  and  the  Adductor  magnus 
and  the  medial  intermuscular  septum.    Its  fibers  are  directed  downward  and  for- 
ward, and  are  chiefly  attached  to  an  aponeurosis  which  lies  on  the  deep  surface 
of  the  muscle  and  is  inserted  into  the  medial  border  of  the  patella  and  the  Quad- 
ra riceps  femoris  tendon,  an  expansion  being  sent  to  the  capsule  of  the  knee-joint. 
Hp     The  Vastus  intermedius  (Crureus)  arises  from  the  front  and  lateral  surfaces  of  the 
'       body  of  the  femur  in  its  upper  two-thirds  and  from  the  lower  part  of  the  lateral 
"intermuscular  septum.     Its  fibers  end  in  a  superficial  aponeurosis,  which  forms 
■■the  deep  part  of  the  Quadriceps  femoris  tendon. 

The  tendons  of  the  different  portions  of  the  Quadriceps  unite  at  the  lower  part  of  the  thigh, 
80  as  to  form  a  single  strong  tendon,  which  is  inserted  into  the  base  of  the  patella,  some  few  fibera 
passing  over  it  to  blend  with  the  ligamentum  patellae.  More  properly,  the  patella  may  be  regarded 
aa  a  sesamoid  bone,  developed  in  the  tendon  of  the  Quadriceps;  and  the  ligamentum  patellae, 
which  is  continued  from  the  apex  of  the  patella  to  the  tuberosity  of  the  tibia,  as  the  proper  tendon 
of  insertion  of  the  muscle,  the  medial  and  lateral  patellar  retinacula  (see  p.  338)  being  expan- 
sions from  its  borders.  A  bursa,  which  usually  communicates  with  the  cavity  of  the  knee-joint, 
is  situated  between  the  femur  and  the  portion  of  the  Quadriceps  tendon  above  the  patella;  another 
is  interposed  between  the  tendon  and  the  upper  part  of  the  front  of  the  tibia;  and  a  third,  the 
irepatellar  bursa,  is  placed  over  the  patella  itself. 


f 


The  Articularis  genu  (Subcrureus)  is  a  small  muscle,  usually  distinct  from  the 
astus  intermedius,  but  occasionally  blended  with  it;  it  arises  from  the  anterior 
surface  of  the  lower  part  of  the  body  of  the  femur,  and  is  inserted  into  the  upper 
part  of  the  synovial  membrane  of  the  knee-joint.  It  sometimes  consists  of  several 
separate  muscular  bundles. 


11. 


Nerves. — The  muscles  of  this  region  are  supplied  by  the  second,  third,  and  fourth  lumbar 
erves,  through  the  femoral  nerve. 

Actions. — The  Sartoriua  flexes  the  leg  upon  the  thigh,  and,  continuing  to  act,  flexes  the  thigh 
upon  the  pelvis;  it  next  abducts  and  rotates  the  thigh  outward.  When  the  knee  is  bent,  the 
Sartorius  assists  the  Semitendinosus,  Semimembranosus,  and  Popliteus  in  rotating  the  tibia  inward. 
Taking  its  fixed  point  from  the  leg,  it  flexes  the  pelvis  upon  the  thigh,  and,  if  one  muscle  acts,  assists 
in  rotating  the  pelvis.  The  Quadriceps  femoris  extends  the  leg  upon  the  thigh.  The  Rectus 
femoris  assists  the  Psoas  major  and  Iliacus  in  supporting  the  pelvis  and  trunk  upon  the  femur. 
It  also  assists  in  flexing  the  thigh  on  the  pelvis,  or  if  the  thigh  be  fixed  it  will  flex  the  pelvis.  The 
Vastus  medialis  draws  the  patella  medialward  as  well  as  upward. 


2.  The  Medial  Femoral  Muscles. 

Gracilis.  Adductor  longus.  Adductor  magnus. 

Pectineus.  Adductor  brevis. 


P  The  Gracilis  (Fig.  430)  is  the  most  superficial  muscle  on  the  medial  side  of  the 
thigh.  It  is  thin  and  flattened,  broad  above,  narrow  and  tapering  below.  It 
arises  by  a  thin  aponeurosis  from  the  anterior  margins  of  the  lower  half  of  the 
symphysis  pubis  and  the  upper  half  of  the  pubic  arch.  The  fibers  run  vertically 
downward,  and  end  in  a  rounded  tendon,  which  passes  behind  the  medial  condyle 
of  the  femur,  curves  around  the  medial  condyle  of  the  tibia,  where  it  becomes  flat- 


MYOLOGY 

tened,  and  is  inserted  into  the  upper  part  of  the  medial  surface  of  the  body  of  thfl 
tibia,  below  the  condyle.  A  few  of  the  fibers  of  the  lower  part  of  the  tendon  are 
prolonged  into  the  deep  fascia  of  the  leg.  At  its  insertion  the  tendon  is  situated 
immediately  above  that  of  the  Semitendinosus,  and  its  upper  edge  is  overlapped 
by  the  tendon  of  the  Sartorius,  with  which  it  is  in  part  blended.  It  is  separated 
from  the  tibial  collateral  ligament  of  the  knee-joint,  by  a  bursa  common  to  it  and 
the  tendon  of  the  Semitendinosus. 


Rectus  femoris  M. 


Femur 


Vasttis  intermedius 
M 


Linea  aspera 


Deep  femoral  artery 
and  vein 


Sartorius  M. 


^.Saphenous  nerve 


Femoral  vein 
and  artery 


Intermediate 
...  cutancjus 
nerve 


Great  saphenous 
vein 


^Adductor 
longus  M. 


^Gracilis  M. 


Intermuscular 

septum  of 
f'cdian  femoral 


.Perforating  artery 
arid  vein 


Vastus  lateralis  Al. 

Intermuscular  septu  m 
,  of  lateral  femoral 


^"^  Semimembranosus  M. 


Biceps  femoris  M.  \ 

[captit  breve]  ', 

Biceps  femoris  M. 
[caput  longum] 


Semitendinosus  M 


Isch  I 


1  'usitnur  femoral 
cutaneous  nerve 


Adductor  magnus  M. 
Fig.  432. — Cross-section  through  the  middle  of  the  thigh.      (Eycleshymer  and  Schoemaker.) 


•1 


The  Pectineus  (Fig.  430)  is  a  flat,  quadrangular  muscle,  situated  at  the  anterior 
part  of  the  upper  and  medial  aspect  of  the  thigh.  It  arises  from  the  pectineal  line, 
and  to  a  slight  extent  from  the  surface  of  bone  in  front  of  it,  between  the 
iliopectineal  eminence  and  tubercle  of  the  pubis,  and  from  the  fascia  covering  the 
anterior  surface  of  the  muscle;  the  fibers  pass  downward,  backward,  and  lateral- 
ward,  to  be  inserted  into  a  rough  line  leading  from  the  lesser  trochanter  to  the 
linea  aspera. 

The  Adductor  longus  (Fig.  433),  the  most  superficial  of  the  three  Adductores, 
is  a  triangular  muscle,  lying  in  the  same  plane  as  the  Pectineus.  It  arises  by  a 
flat,  narrow  tendon,  from  the  front  of  the  pubis,  at  the  angle  of  junction  of  the  crest 


THE  MEDIAL  FEMORAL 


with  the  symphysis;  and  soon  expands  into  a  broad  fleshy  belly.  This  passes 
downward,  backward,  and  lateralward,  and  is  inserted,  by  an  aponeurosis,  into  the 
linea  aspera,  between  the  Vastus  medialis  and  the  Adductor  magnus,  with  both 
of  which  it  is  usually  blended. 

The  Adductor  brevis  (Fig.  433)  is  situ- 
ated immediately  behind  the  two  preceding 
muscles.  It  is  somewhat  triangular  in  form, 
and  arises  by  a  narrow  origin  from  the 
outer  surfaces  of  the  superior  and  inferior 
rami  of  the  pubis,  between  the  Gracilis 
and  Obturator  externus.  Its  fibers,  passing 
backward,  lateralward,  and  downward,  are 
inserted,  by  an  aponeurosis,  into  the  line 
leading  from  the  lesser  trochanter  to  the 
linea  aspera  and  into  the  upper  part  of  the 
linea  aspera,  immediately  behind  the  Pectin- 
eus  and  upper  part  of  the  Adductor  longus. 

The  Adductor  magnus  (Fig.  433)  is  a  large 
triangular  muscle,  situated  on  the  medial  side 
of  the  thigh.  It  arises  from  a  small  part 
of  the  inferior  ramus  of  the  pubis,  from  the 
inferior  ramus  of  the  ischium,  and  from  the 
outer  margin  of  the  inferior  part  of  the 
tuberosity  of  the  ischium.  Those  fibers 
which  arise  from  the  ramus  of  the  pubis  are 
short,  horizontal  in  direction,  and  are  inserted 
into  the  rough  line  leading  from  the  greater 
trochanter  to  the  linea  aspera,  medial  to  the 
Glutseus  maximus;  those  from  the  ramus  of 
the  ischium  are  directed  downward  and  lat- 
eralward with  different  degrees  of  obliquity, 
to  be  inserted,  by  means  of  a  broad  aponeu- 
rosis, into  the  linea  aspera  and  the  upper 
part  of  its  medial  prolongation  below.  The 
medial  portion  of  the  muscle,  composed 
principally  of  the  fibers  arising  from  the 
tuberosity  of  the  ischium,  forms  a  thick 
fleshy  mass  consisting  of  coarse  bundles 
which  descend  almost  vertically,  and  end 
about  the  lower  third  of  the  thigh  in  a 
rounded  tendon  which  is  inserted  into  the 
adductor  tubercle  on  the  medial  condyle  of 
the  femur,  and  is  connected  by  a  fibrous 
expansion  to  the  line  leading  upward  from 
the  tubercle  to  the  linea  aspera.  At  the 
insertion  of  the  muscle,  there  is  a  series  of 
osseoaponeurotic  openings,  formed  by  tendi- 
nous arches  attached  to  the  bone.  The 
upper  four  openings  are  small,  and  give 
passage  to  the  perforating  branches  of  the 
profunda  femoris  artery.  The  lowest  is  of 
large  size,  and  transmits  the  femoral  vessels 

to  the  popliteal  fossa.  ^^°-  ^^S-Deep  musdes^of  the  medial  femoral 


474  i^^^^^^m        MYOLOGY 

Variations. — The  Pectineus  is  sometimes  divided  into  an  outer  part  supplied  by  the  femoral 
nerve  and  an  inner  part  supplied  by  the  obturator  nerve.  The  muscle  may  be  attached  to  or 
inserted  into  the  capsule  of  the  hip-joint.  The  Adductor  longus  may  be  double,  may  extend  to  the  , 
knee,  or  be  more  or  less  united  with  the  Pectineus.  The  Adductor  brevis  may  be  divided  into  two  ' 
or  three  parts,  or  it  may  be  united  to  the  Adductor  magnus.  The  Adductor  magnus  may  be  more 
or  less  segmented,  the  anterior  and  superior  portion  is  often  described  as  a  separate  muscle,  the 
Adductor  minimus.    The  muscle  may  be  fused  with  the  Quadratus  femoris. 

Nerves. — The  three  Adductores  and  the  Gracilis  are  supplied  by  the  third  and  fourth  lumbar 
nerves  through  the  obturator  nerve;  the  Adductor  magnus  receiving  an  additional  branch  from 
the  sacral  plexus  through  the  sciatic.  The  Pectineus  is  suppHed  by  the  second,  third,  and  fourth 
lumbar  nerves  through  the  femoral  nerve,  and  by  the  third  lumbar  through  the  accessory  obturator - 
when  this  latter  exists.    Occasionally  it  receives  a  branch  from  the  obturator  nerve.^  * 

Actions. — The  Pectineus  and  three  Adductores  adduct  the  thigh  powerfully;  they  are  especially 
used  in  horse  exercise,  the  sides  of  the  saddle  being  grasped  between  the  knees  by  the  contraction 
of  these  muscles.  In  consequence  of  the  obliquity  of  their  insertions  into  the  Unea  aspera,  they 
rotate  the  thigh  outward,  assisting  the  external  Rotators,  and  when  the  limb  has  been  abducted, 
they  draw  it  medialward,  carrying  the  thigh  across  that  of  the  opposite  side.  The  Pectineus 
and  Adductores  brevis  and  longus  assist  the  Psoas  major  and  Iliacus  in  flexing  the  thigh  upon 
the  pelvis.  In  progression,  all  these  muscles  assist  in  drawing  forward  the  lower  hmb.  The 
Gracilis  assists  the  Sartorius  in  flexing  the  leg  and  rotating  it  inward;  it  is  also  an  adductor  of  the 
thigh.  If  the  lower  extremities  be  fixed,  these  muscles,  taking  their  fixed  points  below,  may  act 
upon  the  pelvis,  serving  to  maintain  the  body  in  an  erect  posture;  or,  if  their  action  be  continued, 
flex  the  pelvis  forward  upon  the  femur. 

3.  The  Muscles  of  the  Gluteal  Region  (Fig.  434). 

Glutseus  maximus.  Obturator  internus. 

Glutseus  medius.  Gemellus  superior. 

Glutseus  minimus.  Gemellus  inferior. 

Tensor  fasciae  latae.  Quadratus  femoris. 

Piriformis.  Obturator  externus. 

The  Glutseus  maximus,  the  most  superficial  muscle  in  the  gluteal  region,  is  a 
broad  and  thick  fleshy  mass  of  a  quadrilateral  shape,  and  forms  the  prominence 
of  the  nates.  Its  large  size  is  one  of  the  most  characteristic  features  of  the  muscular 
system  in  man,  connected  as  it  is  with  the  power  he  has  of  maintaining  the  trunk 
in  the  erect  posture.  The  muscle  is  remarkably  coarse  in  structure,  being  made 
up  of  fasciculi  lying  parallel  with  one  another  and  collected  together  into  large 
bundles  separated  by  fibrous  septa.  It  arises  from  the  posterior  gluteal  line  of 
the  ilium,  and  the  rough  portion  of  bone  including  the  crest,  immediately  above 
and  behind  it;  from  the  posterior  surface  of  the  lower  part  of  the  sacrum  and  the 
side  of  the  coccyx;  from  the  aponeurosis  of  the  Sacrospinalis,  the  sacrotuberous 
ligament,  and  the  fascia  (gluteal  aponeurosis)  covering  the  Glutaeus  medius. 
The  fibers  are  directed  obliquely  downward  and  lateralward;  those  forming  the 
upper  and  larger  portion  of  the  muscle,  together  with  the  superficial  fibers  of  the 
lower  portion,  end  in  a  thick  tendinous  lamina,  which  passes  across  the  greater 
trochanter,  and  is  inserted  into  the  iliotibial  band  of  the  fascia  lata;  the  deeper 
fibers  of  the  lower  portion  of  the  muscle  are  inserted  into  the  gluteal  tuberosity 
between  the  Vastus  lateralis  and  Adductor  magnus. 

Bursse. — Three  bursse  are  usually  found  in  relation  with  the  deep  surface  of  this  muscle.  One 
of  these,  of  large  size,  and  generally  multilocular,  separates  it  from  the  greater  trochanter;  a 
second,  often  wanting,  is  situated  on  the  tuberosity  of  the  ischium;  a  third  is  found  between 
the  tendon  of  the  muscle  and  that  of  the  Vastus  lateralis. 

The  Glutaeus  medius  is  a  broad,  thick,  radiating  muscle,  situated  on  the  outer 
surface  of  the  pelvis.    Its  posterior  third  is  covered  by  the  Glutaeus  maximus,  its 

'  The  Pectineus  may  consist  of  two  incompletely  separated  strata;  the  lateral  or  dorsal  stratum,  which  is  constant, 
is  supplied  by  a  branch  from  the  femoral  nerve,  or  in  the  absence  of  this  branch  by  the  accessory  obturator  nerve; 
the  medial  or  ventral  stratum,  when  present,  is  supplied  by  the  obturator  nerve. — A.  M.  Paterson.  Journal  of  Anatomy 
and  Physiology,  xxvi,  43. 


I 


^Banterlor  two-thirds  by  the  gluteal 
aponeurosis,  which  separates  it 
from  the  superficial  fascia  and 
integument.  It  arises  from  the 
outer  surface  of  the  ilium  between 
the  iliac  crest  and  posterior  glu- 
teal line  above,  and  the  anterior 
gluteal  line  below;  it  also  arises 

Pfrom    the    gluteal     aponeurosis 
covering  its  outer  surface.    The 
fibers  converge  to  a  strong  flat- 
tened tendon,  which  is  inserted 
^^  into  the  oblique  ridge  which  runs 
^B  downward  and  forward   on  the 
^■lateral  surface  of  the  greater  tro- 
chanter.   A  bursa  separates  the 
tendon  of  the  muscle  from  the 

•  surface  of    the   trochanter  over 
[which  it  glides. 
I     Variations.  —  The  posterior  border 
Imay  be  more  or  less  closely  vmited  to 
the  Piriformis,  or  some  of  the  fibers  end 
on  its  tendon. 

The  Glutseus  minimus,  the  small- 
est of  the  three  Glutaji,  is  placed 
immediately  beneath  the  preced- 
ing. It  is  fan-shaped,  arising  from 
the  outer  surface  of  the  ilium, 
between  the  anterior  and  inferior 
gluteal  lines,  and  behind,  from 
the  margin  of  the  greater  sciatic 
notch.  The  fibers  converge  to 
the  deep  surface  of  a  radiated 
aponeurosis,  and  this  ends  in  a 
tendon  which  is  inserted  into  an 
impression  on  the  anterior  border 
of  the  greater  trochanter,  and 
gives  an  expansion  to  the  capsule 
of  the  hip-joint.  A  bursa  is 
interposed  between  the  tendon 
and  the  greater  trochanter.  Be- 
tween the  Glutseus  medius  and 
Glutseus  minimus  are  the  deep 
branches  of  the  superior  gluteal 
vessels  and  the  superior  gluteal 
nerve.  The  deep  surface  of  the 
Glutseus  minimus  is  in  relation 
with  the  reflected  tendon  of  the 
Rectus  femoris  and  the  capsule 
of  the  hip-joint. 

Variations. — The  muscle  may  be  di- 
vided into  an  anterior  and  a  posterior 
part,  or  it  may  send  slips  to  the  Piri- 
formis, the  Gemellus  superior  or  the 
outer  part  of  the  origm  of  the  Vastus 
lateralis. 


THE  MUSCLES  OF  THE  GLUTEAL  REGION 


475 


P 


t 

II 


Medial 
hamstring 

tendons 
Sartorius 

Cfracilis 

Semitendinosus 
Semi- 
membranosus 


Lateral 
^^hamstring 
tendon 

Biceps 
femoris 


Fia.  434. — Muscles  of  the  gluteal  and  posterior  femoral  regions. 


476 


MYOLOGY 


The  Tensor  fasciae  latae  {Tensor  fascice  femoris)  arises  from  flie~  anterior  "pari 
of  the  outer  lip  of  the  iliac  crest;  from  the  outer  surface  of  the  anterior  superior 
iliac  spine,  and  part  of  the  outer  border  of  the  notch  below  it,  between  the  Glutaeus 
medius  and  Sartorius;  and  from  the  deep  surface  of  the  fascia  lata.  It  is  inserted 
between  the  two  layers  of  the  iliotibial  band  of  the  fascia  lata  about  the  junction 
of  the  middle  and  upper  thirds  of  the  thigh. 

The  Piriformis  is  a  flat  muscle,  pyramidal  in  shape,  lying  almost  parallel  with 
the  posterior  margin  of  the  Glutseus  medius.  It  is  situated  partly  within  the  pelvis 
against  its  posterior  wall,  and  partly  at  the  back  of  the  hip-joint.  It  arises  from 
the  front  of  the  sacrum  by  three  fleshy  digitations,  attached  to  the  portions  of 
bone  between  the  first,  second,  third,  and  fourth  anterior  sacral  foramina,  and  to 
the  grooves  leading  from  the  foramina :  a  few  fibers  also  arise  from  the  margin  of 
the  greater  sciatic  foramen,  and  from  the  anterior  surface  of  the  sacrotuberous 
ligament.  The  muscle  passes  out  of  the  pelvis  through  the  greater  sciatic  fora- 
men, the  upper  part  of  which  it  fills',  and  is  inserted  by  a  rounded  tendon  into 
the  upper  border  of  the  greater  trochanter  behind,  but  often  partly  blended  with, 
the  common  tendon  of  the  Obturator  internus  and  Gemelli. 

Variations. — It  is  frequently  pierced  by  the  common  peroneal  nerve  and  thus  divided  more  or 
less  into  two  parts.  It  may  be  luiited  with  the  Glutaeus  medius,  or  send  fibers  to  the  Glutaeus 
minimus  or  receive  fibers  from  the  Gemellus  superior.  It  may  have  only  one  or  two  sacral  attach- 
ments or  be  inserted  in  to  the  capsule  of  the  hip-joint.    It  may  be  absent. 


Ant.  sup.  iliac  spine- 


Symphysis 
pubis 


Transverse  acetabular 
ligament 


Fig.  435. — The  obturator  membrane. 


^ 


Obturator  Membrane  (Fig.  435). — The  obturator  membrane  is  a  thin  fibrous  sheet, 
which  almost  completely  closes  the  obturator  foramen.  Its  fibers  are  arranged 
in  interlacing  bundles  mainly  transverse  in  direction;  the  uppermost  bundle  is 
attached  to  the  obturator  tubercles  and  completes  the  obturator  canal  for  the  pas- 
sage of  the  obturator  vessels  and  nerve.  The  membrane  is  attached  to  the  sharp 
margin  of  the  obturator  foramen  except  at  its  lower  lateral  angle,  where  it  is  fixed 


THE  MUSCLES  OF  THE  GLUTEAL  REGION  477 


I  to  the  pelvic  surface  of  the  inferior  ramus  of  the  ischium,  i.  e.,  within  the  margin. 
Both  obturator  muscles  are  connected  with  this  membrane. 
The  Obturator  intemus  is  situated  partly  within  the  lesser  pelvis,  and  partly 
at  the  back  of  the  hip-joint.  It  arises  from  the  inner  surface  of  the  antero-lateral 
wall  of  the  pelvis,  where  it  surrounds  the  greater  part  of  the  obturator  foramen, 
being  attached  to  the  inferior  rami  of  the  pubis  and  ischium,  and  at  the  side  to  the 
inner  surface  of  the  hip  bone  below  and  behind  the  pelvic  brim,  reaching  from  the 
upper  part  of  the  greater  sciatic  foramen  above  and  behind  to  the  obturator  fora- 
men below  and  in  front.  It  also  arises  from  the  pelvic  surface  of  the  obturator 
membrane  except  in  the  posterior  part,  from  the  tendinous  arch  which  completes  the 
canal  for  the  passage  of  the  obturator  vessels  and  nerve,  and  to  a  slight  extent  from 
the  obturator  fascia,  which  covers  the  muscle.  The  fibers  converge  rapidly  toward 
the  lesser  sciatic  foramen,  and  end  in  four  or  five  tendinous  bands,  which  are  found 
on  the  deep  surface  of  the  muscle;  these  bands  are  reflected  at  a  right  angle  over 
I        the  grooved  surface  of  the  ischium  between  its  spine  and  tuberosity.    This  bony 

II surface  is  covered  by  smooth  cartilage,  which  is  separated  from  the  tendon  by  a 
[bursa,  and  presents  one  or  more  ridges  corresponding  with  the  furrows  between 
the  tendinous  bands.  These  bands  leave  the  pelvis  through  the  lesser  sciatic  fora- 
men and  unite  into  a  single  flattened  tendon,  which  passes  horizontally  across  the 
capsule  of  the  hip-joint,  and,  after  receiving  the  attachments  of  the  Gemelli,  is 
inserted  into  the  forepart  of  the  medial  surface  of  the  greater  trochanter  above 
the  trochanteric  fossa.    A  bursa,  narrow  and  elongated  in  form,  is  usually  found 

I  between  the  tendon  and  the  capsule  of  the  hip-joint;  it  occasionally  communicates 
I  with  the  bursa  between  the  tendon  and  the  ischium. 
I     The  Gemelli  are  two  small  muscular  fasciculi,  accessories  to  the  tendon  of  the 
I  Obturator  internus  which  is  received  into  a  groove  between  them. 
I     The  Gemellus  superior,  the  smaller  of  the  two,  arises  from  the  outer  surface  of 
I  the  spine  of  the  ischium,  blends  with  the  upper  part  of  the  tendon  of  the  Obturator 
I  internus,  and  is  inserted  with  it  into  the  medial  surface  of  the  greater  trochanter. 
I  It  is  sometimes  wanting. 
I     The  Gemellus  inferior  arises  from  the  upper  part  of  the  tuberosity  of  the  ischium, 
:        immediately  below  the  groove  for  the  Obturator  internus  tendon.    It  blends  with 
-        the  lower  part  of  the  tendon  of  the  Obturator  internus,  and  is  inserted  with  it 
H I  it  into  the  medial  surface  of  the  greater  trochanter.     Rarely  absent. 
HI     The  Quadratus  femoris  is  a  flat,  quadrilateral  muscle,  between  the  Gemellus 

■  ■inferior  and  the  upper  margin  of  the  Adductor  magnus;  it  is  separated  from  the 
'        latter  by  the  terminal  branches  of  the  medial  femoral  circumflex  vessels.    It  arises 

from  the  upper  part  of  the  external  border  of  the  tuberosity  of  the  ischium,  and  is 
inserted  into  the  upper  part  of  the  linea  quadrata — that  is,  the  line  which  extends 
vertically  downward  from  the  intertrochanteric  crest.  A  bursa  is  often  found 
between  the  front  of  this  muscle  and  the  lesser  trochanter.  Sometimes  absent. 
The  Obturator  extemus  (Fig.  436)  is  a  flat,  triangular  muscle,  which  covers 
^    the  outer  surface  of  the  anterior  wall  of  the  pelvis.    It  arises  from  the  margin 

■  I  of  bone  immediately  around  the  medial  side  of  the  obturator  foramen,  viz.,  from 

the  rami  of  the  pubis,  and  the  inferior  ramus  of  the  ischium;  it  also  arises  from  the 
medial  two-thirds  of  the  outer  surface  of  the  obturator  membrane,  and  from  the 
tendinous  arch  which  completes  the  canal  for  the  passage  of  the  obturator  vessels 
and  nerves.  The  fibers  springing  from  the  pubic  arch  extend  on  to  the  inner  sur- 
face of  the  bone,  where  they  obtain  a  narrow  origin  between  the  margin  of  the 
foramen  and  the  attachment  of  the  obturator  membrane.  The  fibers  converge 
and  pass  backward,  lateralward,  and  upward,  and  end  in  a  tendon  which  runs 
across  the  back  of  the  neck  of  the  femur  and  lower  part  of  the  capsule  of  the  hip- 
joint  and  is  inserted  into  the  trochanteric  fossa  of  the  femur.  The  obturator  vessels 
lie  between  the  muscle  and  the  obturator  membrane;  the  anterior  branch  of  the 


l_ 


478 


MYOLOGY 


by  passing  in  front  of  the  muscle,  anc 


obturator  nerve  reaches  the  thigh 
posterior  branch  by  piercing  it. 

Nerves. — The  Glutseus  maximus  is  supplied  by  the  fifth  lumbar  and  first  and  second  sacra 
nerves  through  the  inferior  gluteal  nerve;  the  Gluta?i  medius  and  minimus  and  the  Tensor  fascdae 
latge  by  the  fourth  and  fifth  lumbar  and  first  sacral  nerves  through  the  superior  gluteal;  the  Piri- 
formis is  supplied  by  the  first  and  second  sacral  nerves;  the  Gemellus  inferior  and  Quadrat  us 
femoris  by  the  last  lumbar  and  first  sacral  nerves;  the  Gemellus  superior  and  Obturator  internus 
by  the  first,  second,  and  third  sacral  nerves,  and  the  Obturator  externus  by  the  third  and  fourth 
lumloar  nerves  through  the  obturator. 


Obturator  nerve 


Ant.  inf.  iliac  spine 


Fig.  436. — The  Obturator  externus. 


Actions. — When  the  Glutaeus  maximus  takes  its  fixed  point  from  the  pelvis,  it  extends  the 
femur  and  brings  the  bent  thigh  into  a  line  with  the  body.  Taking  its  fixed  point  from  below, 
it  acts  upon  the  pelvis,  supporting  it  and  the  trunk  upon  the  head  of  the  femur;  this  is  especially 
obvious  in  standing  on  one  leg.  Its  most  powerful  action  is  to  cause  the  body  to  regain  the  erect 
position  after  stooping,  by  drawing  the  pelvis  backward,  being  assisted  in  this  action  by  the 
Biceps  femoris,  Semitendinosus,  and  Semimembranosus.  The  Glutaeus  maximus  is  a  tensor  of 
the  fascia  lata,  and  by  its  connection  with  the  ihotibial  band  steadies  the  femur  on  the  articular 
surfaces  of  the  tibia  during  standing,  when  the  Extensor  muscles  are  relaxed.  The  lower  part 
of  the  muscle  also  acts  as  an  adductor  and  external  rotator  of  the  hmb.  The  Glutsei  medius  and 
minimus  abduct  the  thigh,  when  the  limb  is  extended,  and  are  principally  called  into  action  in 
supporting  the  body  on  one  hmb,  in  conjunction  with  the  Tensor  fasciae  latae.  Their  anterior 
fibers,  by  drawing  the  greater  trochanter  forward,  rotate  the  thigh  inward,  in  which  action  they 
are  also  assisted  by  the  Tensor  fasciae  latae.  The  Tensor  fasciae  latae  is  a  tensor  of  the  fascia  lata; 
continuing  its  action,  the  oblique  direction  of  its  fibers  enables  it  to  abduct  the  thigh  and  to  rotate 
it  inward.  In  the  erect  posture,  acting  from  below,  it  will  serve  to  steady  the  pelvis  upon  the  head 
of  the  femur;  and  by  means  of  the  iliotibial  band  it  steadies  the  condyles  of  the  femur  on  the 
articular  surfaces  of  the  tibia,  and  assists  the  Glutaeus  maximus  in  supporting  the  knee  in  the 
extended  position.  The  remaining  muscles  are  powerful  external  rotators  of  the  thigh.  In  the 
sitting  posture,  when  the  thigh  is  flexed  upon  the  pelvis,  their  action  as  rotators  ceases,  and  they 
become  abductors,  with  the  exception  of  the  Obturator  externus,  which  still  rotates  the  femur 
outward. 


4.  The  Posterior  Femoral  Muscles  (Hamstring  Muscles)  (Fig.  434). 
Biceps  femoris.  Semitendinosus.  Semimembranosus. 

The  Biceps  femoris  (Biceps)  is  situated  on  the  posterior  and  lateral  aspect  of  the 
thigh.     It  has  two  heads  of  origin ;  one,  the  long  head,  arises  from  the  lower  and  inner 


1 


THE  POSTERIOR  FEMORAL  MUSCLES  479 

impression  on  the  back  part  of  the  tuberosity  of  the  ischium,  by  a  tendon  common 
to  it  and  the  Semitendinosus,  and  from  the  lower  part  of  the  sacrotuberous  liga- 
ment; the  other,  the  short  head,  arises  from  the  lateral  lip  of  the  linea  aspera, 
between  the  Adductor  magnus  and  Vastus  lateralis,  extending  up  almost  as  high 
as  the  insertion  of  the  Glutgeus  maximus;  from  the  lateral  prolongation  of  the 
linea  aspera  to  within  5  cm.  of  the  lateral  condyle;  and  from  the  lateral  inter- 
muscular septum.  The  fibers  of  the  long  head  form  a  fusiform  belly,  which  passes 
obliquely  downward  and  lateralward  across  the  sciatic  nerve  to  end  in  an  aponeu- 
rosis which  covers  the  posterior  surface  of  the  muscle,  and  receives  the  fibers  of 
the  short  head;  this  aponeurosis  becomes  gradually  contracted  into  a  tendon, 
which  is  inserted  into  the  lateral  side  of  the  head  of  the  fibula,  and  by  a  small 
slip  into  the  lateral  condyle  of  the  tibia.  At  its  insertion  the  tendon  divides  into 
two  portions,  which  embrace  the  fibular  collateral  ligament  of  the  knee-joint. 
From  the  posterior  border  of  the  tendon  a  thin  expansion  is  given  off  to  the  fascia 
of  the  leg.  The  tendon  of  insertion  of  this  muscle  forms  the  lateral  hamstring; 
the  common  peroneal  nerve  descends  along  its  medial  border. 

Variations. — The  short  head  may  be  absent;  additional  heads  may  arise  from  the  ischial 
tuberosity,  the  linea  aspera,  the  medial  supracondylar  ridge  of  the  femur  or  from  various  other 
parts.    A  slip  may  pass  to  the  Gastrocnemius. 

The  Semitendinosus,  remarkable  for  the  great  length  of  its  tendon  of  insertion, 
is  situated  at  the  posterior  and  medial  aspect  of  the  thigh.  It  arises  from  the  lower 
and  medial  impression  on  the  tuberosity  of  the  ischium,  by  a  tendon  common 
to  it  and  the  long  head  of  the  Biceps  femoris;  it  also  arises  from  an  aponeurosis 
which  connects  the  adjacent  surfaces  of  the  two  muscles  to  the  extent  of  about 
7.5  cm.  from  their  origin.  The  muscle  is  fusiform  and  ends  a  little  below  the  middle 
of  the  thigh  in  a  long  round  tendon  which  lies  along  the  medial  side  of  the  popliteal 
fossa;  it  then  curves  around  the  medial  condyle  of  the  tibia  and  passes  over  the 
tibial  collateral  ligament  of  the  knee-joint,  from  which  it  is  separated  by  a  bursa, 
and  is  inserted  into  the  upper  part  of  the  medial  surface  of  the  body  of  the  tibia, 
nearly  as  far  forward  as  its  anterior  crest.  At  its  insertion  it  gives  off  from  its 
lower  border  a  prolongation  to  the  deep  fascia  of  the  leg  and  lies  behind  the  tendon 
of  the  Sartorius,  and  below  that  of  the  Gracilis,  to  which  it  is  united.  A  tendinous 
intersection  is  usually  observed  about  the  middle  of  the  muscle. 

The  Semimembranosus,  so  called  from  its  membranous  tendon  of  origin,  is  situ- 
ated at  the  back  and  medial  side  of  the  thigh.  It  arises  by  a  thick  tendon  from 
the  upper  and  outer  impression  on  the  tuberosity  of  the  ischium,  above  and  lateral 
to  the  Biceps  femoris  and  Semitendinosus.  The  tendon  of  origin  expands  into  an 
aponeurosis,  which  covers  the  upper  part  of  the  anterior  surface  of  the  muscle;  from 
this  aponeurosis  muscular  fibers  arise,  and  converge  to  another  aponeurosis  which 
covers  the  lower  part  of  the  posterior  surface  of  the  muscle  and  contracts  into  the 
tendon  of  insertion.  It  is  inserted  mainly  into  the  horizontal  groove  on  the  posterior 
medial  aspect  of  the  medial  condyle  of  the  tibia.  The  tendon  of  insertion  gives  off 
certain  fibrous  expansions :  one,  of  considerable  size,  passes  upward  and  lateralward 
to  be  inserted  into  the  back  part  of  the  lateral  condyle  of  the  femur,  forming  part 
of  the  oblique  popliteal  ligament  of  the  knee-joint ;  a  second  is  continued  downward 
to  the  fascia  which  covers  the  Popliteus  muscle;  while  a  few  fibers  join  the  tibial 
collateral  ligament  of  the  joint  and  the  fascia  of  the  leg.  The  muscle  overlaps  the 
upper  part  of  the  popliteal  vessels. 

Variations. — It  may  be  reduced  or  absent,  or  double,  arising  mainly  from  the  sacrotuberous 
ligament  and  giving  a  slip  to  the  femur  or  Adductor  magnus. 

The  tendons  of  insertion  of  the  two  preceding  muscles  form  the  medial  ham- 
strings. 


480  ^^^SSBKI^         MYOLOGY 

Nerves. — The  muscles  of  this  region  are  supplied  by  the  fourth  and  fifth  lumbar  and  the-ffifst 
second,  and  third  sacral  nerves;  the  nerve  to  the  short  head  of  the  Biceps  femoris  is  derived  frona 
the  common  peroneal,  the  other  muscles  are  supplied  through  the  tibial  nerve. 

Actions. — The  hamstring  muscles  flex  the  leg  upon  the  thigh.  When  the  knee  is  semiflexed, 
the  Biceps  femoris  in  consequence  of  its  oblique  direction  rotates  the  leg  slightly  outward;  and 
the  Semitendinosus,  and  to  a  slight  extent  the  Semimembranosus,  rotate  the  leg  inward,  assist- 
ing the  Popliteus.  Taking  their  fixed  point  from  below,  these  muscles  serve  to  support  the  pelvis 
upon  the  head  of  the  femur,  and  to  draw  the  trunk  directly  backward,  as  in  raising  it  from  the 
stooping  position  or  in  feats  of  strength,  when  the  body  is  thrown  backward  in  the  form  of  an 
arch.  As  already  indicated  on  page  285,  complete  flexion  of  the  hip  cannot  be  effected  unless 
the  knee-joint  is  also  flexed,  on  account  of  the  shortness  of  the  hamstring  muscles. 

m.    THE  MUSCLES  AND  FASCMl  OF  THE  LEG. 

The  muscles  of  the  leg  may  be  divided  into  three  groups:  anterior,  posterior, 
and  lateral. 

1.  The  Anterior  Crural  Muscles  (Fig.  437). 

Tibialis  anterior.  Extensor  digitorum  longus. 

Extensor  hallucis  longus.  Peronseus  tertius. 

Deep  Fascia  {fascia  cruris) . — The  deep  fascia  of  the  leg  forms  a  complete  invest- 
ment to  the  muscles,  and  is  fused  with  the  periosteum  over  the  subcutaneous 
surfaces  of  the  bones.  It  is  continuous  above  with  the  fascia  lata,  and  is  attached 
around  the  knee  to  the  patella,  the  ligamentum  patellae,  the  tuberosity  and  con- 
dyles of  the  tibia,  and  the  head  of  the  fibula.  Behind,  it  forms  the  popliteal  fascia, 
covering  in  the  popliteal  fossa;  here  it  is  strengthened  by  transverse  fibers,  and 
perforated  by  the  small  saphenous  vein.  It  receives  an  expansion  from  the  tendon 
of  the  Biceps  femoris  laterally,  and  from  the  tendons  of  the  Sartorius,  Gracilis, 
Semitendinosus,  and  Semimembranosus  medially;  in  front,  it  blends  with  the  peri- 
osteum covering  the  subcutaneous  surface  of  the  tibia,  and  with  that  covering 
the  head  and  malleolus  of  the  fibula;  below,  it  is  continuous  with  the  transverse 
crural  and  laciniate  ligaments.  It  is  thick  and  dense  in  the  upper  and  anterior 
part  of  the  leg,  and  gives  attachment,  by  its  deep  surface,  to  the  Tibialis  anterior 
and  Extensor  digitorum  longus;  but  thinner  behind,  where  it  covers  the  Gastroc- 
nemius and  Soleus.  It  gives  off  from  its  deep  surface,  on  the  lateral  side  of  the  leg, 
two  strong  intermuscular  septa,  the  anterior  and  posterior  peroneal  septa,  which 
enclose  the  Peronsei  longus  and  brevis,  and  separate  them  from  the  muscles  of 
the  anterior  and  posterior  crural  regions,  and  several  more  slender  processes  which 
enclose  the  individual  muscles  in  each  region.  A  broad  transverse  intermuscular 
septum,  called  the  deep  transverse  fascia  of  the  leg,  intervenes  between  the  super- 
ficial and  deep  posterior  crural  muscles. 

The  Tibialis  anterior  {Tibialis  anticus)  is  situated  on  the  lateral  side  of  the  tibia; 
it  is  thick  and  fleshy  above,  tendinous  below.  It  arises  from  the  lateral  condyle 
and  upper  half  or  two-thirds  of  the  lateral  surface  of  the  body  of  the  tibia;  from 
the  adjoining  part  of  the  interosseous  membrane;  from  the  deep  surface  of  the 
fascia;  and  from  the  intermuscular  septum  between  it  and  the  Extensor  digitorum 
longus.  The  fibers  run  vertically  downward,  and  end  in  a  tendon,  which  is  apparent 
on  the  anterior  surface  of  the  muscle  at  the  lower  third  of  the  leg.  After  passing 
through  the  most  medial  compartments  of  the  transverse  and  cruciate  crural 
ligaments,  it  is  inserted  into  the  medial  and  under  surface  of  the  first  cuneiform 
bone,  and  the  base  of  the  first  metatarsal  bone.  This  muscle  overlaps  the  anterior 
tibial  vessels  and  deep  peroneal  nerve  in  the  upper  part  of  the  leg. 

Variations. — A  deep  portion  of  the  muscle  is  rarely  inserted  into  the  talus,  or  a  tendinous  slip 
may  pass  to  the  head  of  the  first  metatarsal  bone  or  the  base  of  the  first  phalanx  of  the  great  toe. 
The  Tibiofascialis  anterior,  a  small  muscle  from  the  lower  part  of  the  tibia  to  the  transverse  or 
cruciate  crural  ligaments  or  deep  fascia. 


THE  ANTERIOR  CRURAL  MUSCLES 


481 


The  Extensor  hallucis  longus  {Extensor  proprius 
hallucis)  is  a  thin  muscle,  situated  between  the 
Tibialis  anterior  and  the  Extensor  digitorum 
longus.  It  arises  from  the  anterior  surface  of  the 
fibula  for  about  the  middle  two-fourths  of  its 
extent,  medial  to  the  origin  of  the  Extensor  digi- 
torum longus;  it  also  arises  from  the  interosseous 
membrane  to  a  similar  extent.  The  anterior 
tibial  vessels  and  deep  peroneal  nerve  lie  between 
it  and  the  Tibialis  anterior.  The  fibers  pass 
downward,  and  end  in  a  tendon,  which  occupies 
the  anterior  border  of  the  muscle,  passes  through 
a  distinct  compartment  in  the  cruciate  crural 
ligament,  crosses  from  the  lateral  to  the  medial 
side  of  the  anterior  tibial  vessels  near  the  bend  of 
the  ankle,  and  is  inserted  into  the  base  of  the  distal 
phalanx  of  the  great  toe.  Opposite  the  metatarso- 
phalangeal articulation,  the  tendon  gives  off  a  thin 
prolongation  on  either  side,  to  cover  the  surface 
of  the  joint.  An  expansion  from  the  medial  side 
of  the  tendon  is  usually  inserted  into  the  base  of 
the  proximal  phalanx. 

Variations. — Occasionally  united  at  its  origin  with  the 
Extensor  digitorum  longvis.  Extensor  ossis  metatarsi  hal- 
lucis, a  small  muscle,  sometimes  found  as  a  slip  from  the 
Extensor  hallucis  longus,  or  from  the  Tibialis  anterior,  or 
from  the  Extensor  digitorum  longus,  or  as  a  distinct  mus- 
cle; it  traverses  the  same  compartment  of  the  transverse 
ligament  with  the  Extensor  hallucis  longus. 

The  Extensor  digitonim  longus  is  a  penniform 
muscle,  situated  at  the  lateral  part  of  the  front 
of  the  leg.  It  arises  from  the  lateral  condyle  of 
the  tibia;  from  the  upper  three-fourths  of  the 
anterior  surface  of  the  body  of  the  fibula;  from 
the  upper  part  of  the  interosseous  membrane; 
from  the  deep  surface  of  the  fascia;  and  from  the 
intermuscular  septa  between  it  and  the  Tibialis 
anterior  on  the  medial,  and  the  Peronsei  on  the 
lateral  side.  Between  it  and  the  Tibialis  anterior 
are  the  upper  portions  of  the  anterior  tibial  vessels 
and  deep  peroneal  nerve.  The  tendon  passes  under 
the  transverse  and  cruciate  crural  ligaments  in 
company  with  the  Peronseus  tertius,  and  divides 
into  four  slips,  which  run  forward  on  the  dorsum 
of  the  foot,  and  are  inserted  into  the  second  and 
third  phalanges  of  the  four  lesser  toes.  The  ten- 
dons to  the  second,  third,  and  fourth  toes  are 
each  joined,  opposite  the  metatarsophalangeal 
articulation,  on  the  lateral  side  by  a  tendon  of 
the  Extensor  digitorum  brevis.  The  tendons  are 
inserted  in  the  following  manner:  each  receives  a 
fibrous  expansion  from  the  Interossei  and  Lum- 
bricalis,  and  then  spreads  out  into  a  broad  apon- 
eurosis, which  covers  the  dorsal  surface  of  the 


\ri6li 


xentt 


Fia.  437. — Muscles  of  the  front  of 
the  leg. 


k: 


482  MYOLOGY 


^1 

e  second 


first  phalanx:  this  aponeurosis,  at  the  articulation  of  the  first  with  the 
phalanx,  divides  into  three  slips — an  intermediate,  which  is  inserted  into  the  base 
of  the  second  phalanx;  and  two  collateral  slips,  which,  after  uniting  on  the  dorsal 
surface  of  the  second  phalanx,  are  continued  onward,  to  be  inserted  into  the  base 
of  the  third  phalanx. 

Variations. — This  muscle  varies  considerably  in  the  modes  of  origin  and  the  arrangement  of  itsi 
various  tendons.  The  tendons  to  the  second  and  fifth  toes  may  be  found  doubled,  or  extra  slips 
are  given  off  from  one  or  more  tendons  to  their  corresponding  metatarsal  bones,  or  to  the  short 
extensor,  or  to  one  of  the  interosseous  muscles.  A  slip  to  the  great  toe  from  the  innermost  tendon 
has  been  found. 

The  Peronseus  tertius  is  a  part  of  the  Extensor  digitorum  longus,  and  might 
be  described  as  its  fifth  tendon.  The  fibers  belonging  to  this  tendon  arise  from 
the  lower  third  or  more  of  the  anterior  surface  of  the  fibula;  from  the  lower  part 
of  the  interosseous  membrane;  and  from  an  intermuscular  septum  between  it 
and  the  Peronseus  brevis.  The  tendon,  after  passing  under  the  transverse  and 
cruciate  crural  ligaments  in  the  same  canal  as  the  Extensor  digitorum  longus, 
is  inserted  into  the  dorsal  surface  of  the  base  of  the  metatarsal  bone  of  the  little 
toe.    This  muscle  is  sometimes  wanting. 

Nerves. — These  muscles  are  supplied  by  the  fourth  and  fifth  lumbar  and  first  sacral  nerves 
through  the  deep  peroneal  nerve. 

Actions. — The  Tibialis  anterior  and  Peronajus  tertius  are  the  direct  flexors  of  the  foot  at  the 
ankle-joint;  the  former  muscle,  when  acting  in  conjunction  with  the  Tibialis  posterior,  raises  the 
medial  border  of  the  foot,  i.  e.,  inverts  the  foot;  and  the  latter,  acting  with  the  Perona?i  brevis 
and  longus,  raises  the  lateral  border  of  the  foot,  i.  e.,  everts  the  foot.  The  Extensor  digitorum 
longus  and  Extensor  hallucis  longus  extend  the  phalanges  of  the  toes,  and,  continuing  their 
action,  flex  the  foot  upon  the  leg.  Taking  their  fixed  points  from  below,  in  the  erect  posture, 
all  these  muscles  serve  to  fix  the  bones  of  the  leg  in  the  perpendicular  position,  and  give  increased 
strength  to  the  ankle-joint. 

2.  The  Posterior  Crural  Muscles. 

The  muscles  of  the  back  of  the  leg  are  subdivided  into  two  groups — superficial 
and  deep.  Those  of  the  superficial  group  constitute  a  pcf^verful  muscular  mass, 
forming  the  calf  of  the  leg.  Their  large  size  is  one  of  the  most  characteristic 
features  of  the  muscular  apparatus  in  man,  and  bears  a  direct  relation  to  his  erect 
attitude  and  his  mode  of  progression. 

The  Superficial  Group  (Fig.  438). 

Gastrocnemius.  Soleus.  Plantaris. 

The  Gastrocnemius  is  the  most  superficial  muscle,  and  forms  the  greater  part 
of  the  calf.  It  arises  by  two  heads,  which  are  connected  to  the  condyles  of  the 
femur  by  strong,  flat  tendons.  The  medial  and  larger  head  takes  its  origin  from  a 
depression  at  the  upper  and  back  part  of  the  medial  condyle  and  from  the  adjacent 
part  of  the  femur.  The  lateral  head  arises  from  an  impression  on  the  side  of  the 
lateral  condyle  and  from  the  posterior  surface  of  the  femur  immediately  above 
the  lateral  part  of  the  condyle.  Both  heads,  also,  arise  from  the  subjacent  part 
of  the  capsule  of  the  knee.  Each  tendon  spreads  out  into  an  aponeurosis,  which 
covers  the  posterior  surface  of  that  portion  of  the  muscle  to  which  it  belongs. 
From  the  anterior  surfaces  of  these  tendinous  expansions,  muscular  fibers  are 
given  off;  those  of  the  medial  head  being  thicker  and  extending  lower  than  those 
of  the  lateral.  The  fibers  unite  at  an  angle  in  the  middle  line  of  the  muscle  in  a 
tendinous  raphe,  which  expands  into  a  broad  aponeurosis  on  the  anterior  surface 
of  the  muscle,  and  into  this  the  remaining  fibers  are  inserted.  The  aponeurosis, 
gradually  contracting,  unites  with  the  tendon  of  the  Soleus,  and  forms  with  it 
the  tendo  calcaneus. 


I^^^^^^H        THE  POSTERIOR  CRURAL  MUSCLES  483 

P  \^Miafions.-^^-X1osence  of  the  outer  head  or  of  the  entire  muscle.  Extra  slips  from  the  popliteal 
[surface  of  the  femur. 
I  The  Soleus  is  a  broad  flat  muscle  situated  immediately  in  front  of  the  Gastroc- 
nemius. It  arises  by  tendinous  fibers  from  the  back  of  the  head  of  the  fibula, 
and  from  the  upper  third  of  the  posterior  surface  of  the  body  of  the  bone;  from  the 
popliteal  line,  and  the  middle  third  of  the  medial  border  of  the  tibia;  some  fibers 

■1  also  arise  from  a  tendinous  arch  placed  between  the  tibial  and  fibular  origins 
|of  the  muscle,  in  front  of  which  the  popliteal  vessels  and  tibial  nerve  run.  The 
fibers  end  in  an  aponeurosis  .which  covers  the  posterior  surface  of  the  muscle,  and, 
gradually  becoming  thicker  and  narrower,  joins  with  the  tendon  of  the  Gastroc- 
Inemius,  and  forms  with  it  the  tendo  calcaneus. 

Variations. — Accessory  head  to  its  lower  and  inner  part  usually  ending  in  the  tendocalcaneus,  or 
[the  calcaneus,  or  the  laciniate  ligament. 

The  Gastrocnemius  and  Soleus  together  form  a  muscular  mass  which  is  occa- 
sionally described  as  the  Triceps  surse;  its  tendon  of  insertion  is  the  tendo  calcaneus. 

Tendo  Calcaneus  {tendo  Achillis) . — The  tendo  calcaneus,  the  common  tendon  of  the 
Gastrocnemius  and  Soleus,  is  the  thickest  and  strongest  in  the  body.  It  is  about 
15  cm.  long,  and  begins  near  the  middle  of  the  leg,  but  receives  fleshy  fibers  on  its 
anterior  surface,  almost  to  its  lower  end.  Gradually  becoming  contracted  below, 
it  is  inserted  into  the  middle  part  of  the  posterior  surface  of  the  calcaneus,  a  bursa 
being  interposed  between  the  tendon  and  the  upper  part  of  this  surface.  The  ten- 
don spreads  out  somewhat  at  its  lower  end,  so  that  its  narrowest  part  is  about 
4  cm.  above  its  insertion.  It  is  covered  by  the  fascia  and  the  integument,  and  is 
separated  from  the  deep  muscles  and  vessels  by  a  considerable  interval  filled  up 
with  areolar  and  adipose  tissue.  Along  its  lateral  side,  but  superficial  to  it,  is  the 
small  saphenous  vein. 

The  Plantaris  is  placed  between  the  Gastrocnemius  and  Soleus.  It  arises  from 
the  lower  part  of  the  lateral  prolongation  of  the  linea  aspera,  and  from  the  oblique 
popliteal  ligament  of  the  knee-joint.  It  forms  a  small  fusiform  belly,  from  7  to 
10  cm.  long,  ending  in  a  long  slender  tendon  which  crosses  obliquely  between  the 
two  muscles  of  the  calf,  and  runs  along  the  medial  border  of  the  tendo  calcaneus, 
to  be  inserted  with  it  into  the  posterior  part  of  the  calcaneus.  This  muscle  is  some- 
times double,  and  at  other  times  wanting.  Occasionally,  its  tendon  is  lost  in  the 
laciniate  ligament,  or  in  the  fascia  of  the  leg. 

Nerves. — The  Gastrocnemius  and  Soleus  are  suppUed  by  the  first  and  second  sacral  nerves, 
and  the  Plantaris  by  the  fourth  and  fifth  lumbar  and  first  sacral  nerves,  through  the  tibial  nerve. 

Actions. — The  muscles  of  the  calf  are  the  chief  extensors  of  the  foot  at  the  ankle-joint.  They 
possess  considerable  power,  and  are  constantly  called  into  use  in  standing,  walking,  dancing, 
and  leaping;  hence  the  large  size  they  usually  present.  In  walking,  these  muscles  raise  the  heel 
from  the  ground;  the  body  being  thus  supported  on  the  raised  foot,  the  opposite  limb  can  be 
carried  forward.  In  standing,  the  Soleus,  taking  its  fixed  point  from  below,  steadies  the  leg  upon 
the  foot  and  prevents  the  body  from  falling  forward.  The  Gastrocnemius,  acting  from  below, 
serves  to  flex  the  femur  upon  the  tibia,  assisted  by  the  PopUteus.  The  Plantaris  is  the  rudiment 
of  a  large  muscle  which  in  some  of  the  lower  animals  is  continued  over  the  calcaneus  to  be  inserted 
into  the  plantar  aponeurosis.  In  man  it  is  an  accessory  to  the  Gastrocnemius,  extending  the 
ankle  if  the  foot  be  free,  or  bending  the  knee  if  the  foot  be  fixed. 


ki 

