on  the  thorax  it  is  continuous  with  the  deep  fascia  of  the  axilla  and  chest,  and  on 
the  abdomen  with  that  covering  the  abdominal  muscles;  below,  it  is  attached  to 
the  crest  of  the  ilium. 

The  Trapezius  (Fig.  409)  is  a  flat,  triangular  muscle,  covering  the  upper  and 
back  part  of  the  neck  and  shoulders.  It  arises  from  the  external  occipital  protu- 
berance and  the  medial  third  of  the  superior  nuchal  line  of  the  occipital  bone,  from 
the  ligamentum  nuchse,  the  spinous  process  of  the  seventh  cervical,  and  the  spinous 
processes  of  all  the  thoracic  vertebrae,  and  from  the  corresponding  portion  of  the 
supraspinal  ligament.  From  this  origin,  the  superior  fibers  proceed  downward 
and  lateralward,  the  inferior  upward  and  lateralward,  and  the  middle  horizontally; 
the  superior  fibers  are  inserted  into  the  posterior  border  of  the  lateral  third  of  the 
clavicle;  the  middle  fibers  into  the  medial  margin  of  the  acromion,  and  into  the  supe- 
rior lip  of  the  posterior  border  of  the  spine  of  the  scapula;  the  inferior  fibers  con- 
verge near  the  scapula,  and  end  in  an  aponeurosis,  which  glides  over  the  smooth 
triangular  surface  on  the  medial  end  of  the  spine,  to  be  inserted  into  a  tubercle 
at  the  apex  of  this  smooth  triangular  surface.  At  its  occipital  origin,  the  Trapezius 
is  connected  to  the  bone  by  a  thin  fibrous  lamina,  firmly  adherent  to  the  skin. 
At  the  middle  it  is  connected  to  the  spinous  processes  by  a  broad  semi-elliptical 
aponeurosis,  which  reaches  from  the  sixth  cervical  to  the  third  thoracic  vertebrae, 
and  forms,  with  that  of  the  opposite  muscle,  a  tendinous  ellipse.  The  rest  of  the 
muscle  arises  by  numerous  short  tendinous  fibers.  The  two  Trapezius  muscles 
together  resemble  a  trapezium,  or  diamond-shaped  quadrangle:  two  angles  corre- 
sponding to  the  shoulders;  a  third  to  the  occipital  protuberance;  and  the  fourth 
to  the  spinous  process  of  the  twelfth  thoracic  vertebra. 

Variations. — The  attachments  to  the  dorsal  vertebrae  are  often  reduced  and  the  lower  ones  are 
often  wanting;  the  occipital  attachment  is  often  wanting;  separation  between  cervical  and  dorsal 
portions  is  frequent.    Extensive  deficiencies  and  complete  absence  occur. 

The  clavicular  insertion  of  this  muscle  varies  in  extent;  it  sometimes  reaches 
as  far  as  the  middle  of  the  clavicle,  and  occasionally  may  blend  with  the  posterior 
edge  of  the  Sternocleidomastoideus,  or  overlap  it. 

The  Latissimus  dorsi  (Fig.  409)  is  a  triangular,  flat  muscle,  which  covers  the 
lumbar  region  and  the  lower  half  of  the  thoracic  region,  and  is  gradually  con- 
tracted into  a  narrow  fasciculus  at  its  insertion  into  the  humerus.  It  arises  by 
tendinous  fibers  from  the  spinous  processes  of  the  lower  six  thoracic  vertebrae 
and  from  the  posterior  layer  of  the  lumbodorsal  fascia  (see  page  397),  by  which 
it  is  attached  to  the  spines  of  the  lumbar  and  sacral  vertebrae,  to  the  supraspinal 
ligament,  and  to  the  posterior  part  of  the  crest  of  the  ilium.    It  also  arises  by 


I 


I 


MUSCLES  OF  THE  UPPER  EXTREMITY 


433 


Fia    409. — Muscles  connecting  the  upper  extremity  to  the  vertebral  column. 


28 


434  VHaBHaV        MYOLOGY 

muscular  fibers  from  the  external  lip  of  the  crest  of  the  ilium  lateral  to  the  margin  j 
of  the  Sacrospinalis,  and  from  the  three  or  four  lower  ribs  by  fleshy  digitations^ ' 
which  are  interposed  between  similar  processes  of  the  Obliquus  abdominis  externus  j 
(Fig.  392,  page  409).    From  this  extensive  origin  the  fibers  pass  in  different  direc-  [ 
tions,  the  upper  ones  horizontally,  the  middle  obliquely  upward,  and  the  lower 
vertically  upward,  so  as  to  converge  and  form  a  thick  fasciculus,  which  crosses  the 
inferior  angle  of  the  scapula,  and  usually  receives  a  few  fibers  from  it.    The  muscle 
curves  around  the  lower  border  of  the  Teres  major,  and  is  twisted  upon  itself,  so 
that  the  superior  fibers  become  at  first  posterior  and  then  inferior,  and  the  vertical 
fibers  at  first  anterior  and  then  superior.    It  ends  in  a  quadrilateral  tendon,  about 
7  cm,  long,  which  passes  in  front  of  the  tendon  of  the  Teres  major,  and  is  inserted 
into  the  bottom  of  the  intertubercular  groove  of  the  humerus;  its  insertion  extends 
higher  on  the  humerus  than  that  of  the  tendon  of  the  Pectoralis  major.    The  lower 
border  of  its  tendon  is  united  with  that  of  the  Teres  major,  the  surfaces  of  the  two  | 
being  separated  near  their  insertions  by  a  bursa;  another  bursa  is  sometimes  inter- 
posed between  the  muscle  and  the  inferior  angle  of  the  scapula.    The  tendon  of 
the  muscle  gives  off  an  expansion  to  the  deep  fascia  of  the  arm. 

Variations. — The  number  of  dorsal  vertebrae  to  which  it  is  attached  vary  from  four  to  seven  or 
eight;  the  number  of  costal  attachments  varies;  muscle  fibers  may  or  may  not  reach  the  crest  of 
the  ilium.  \ 

A  muscular  slip,  the  axillary  arch,  varying  from  7  to  10  cm.  in  length,  and  from  5  to  15  mm. 
in  breadth,  occasionally  springs  from  the  upper  edge  of  the  Latissimus  dorsi  about  the  middle 
of  the  posterior  fold  of  the  axilla,  and  crosses  the  axilla  in  front  of  the  axillary  vessels  and  nerves, 
to  join  the  under  surface  of  the  tendon  of  the  Pectoralis  major,  the  Coracobrachialis,  or  the  fascia 
over  the  Biceps  brachii.  This  axillary  arch  crosses  the  axillary  artery,  just  above  the  spot  usually 
selected  for  the  apphcation  of  a  hgature,  and  may  mislead  the  surgeon  during  the  operation.  It 
is  present  in  about  7  per  cent,  of  subjects  and  may  be  easily  recognized  by  the  transverse  direction 
of  its  fibers. 

A  fibrous  slip  usually  passes  from  the  lower  border  of  the  tendon  of  the  Latissimus  dorsi,  near 
its  insertion,  to  the  long  head  of  the  Triceps  brachii.  This  is  occasionally  muscular,  and  is  the 
representative  of  the  Dorsoepitrochlearis  brachii  of  apes. 

The  lateral  margin  of  the  Latissimus  dorsi  is  separated  below  from  the  Obliquus 
externus  abdominis  by  a  small  triangular  interval,  the  lumbar  triangle  of  Petit, 
the  base  of  which  is  formed  by  the  iliac  crest,  and  its  floor  by  the  Obliquus  internum 
abdominis.  Another  triangle  is  situated  behind  the  scapula.  It  is  bounded  above 
by  the  Trapezius,  below  by  the  Latissimus  dorsi,  and  laterally  by  the  vertebral 
border  of  the  scapula;  the  floor  is  partly  formed  by  the  Rhomboideus  major. 
If  the  scapula  be  drawn  forward  by  folding  the  arms  across  the  chest,  and  the 
trunk  bent  forward,  parts  of  the  sixth  and  seventh  ribs  and  the  interspace  between 
them  become  subcutaneous  and  available  for  auscultation.  The  space  is  there- 
fore known  as  the  triangle  of  auscultation. 

Nerves. — The  Trapezius  is  supplied  by  the  accessory  nerve,  and  by  branches  from  the  third 
and  fourth  cervical  nerves;  the  Latissimus  dorsi  by  the  sixth,  seventh,  and  eighth  cervical  nerves 
through  the  thoracodorsal  (long  subscapular)  nerve. 

The  Rhomboideus  major  (Fig.  409)  arises  by  tendinous  fibers  from  the  spinous 
processes  of  the  second,  third,  fourth,  and  fifth  thoracic  vertebrae  and  the  supra- 
spinal ligament,  and  is  inserted  into  a  narrow  tendinous  arch,  attached  above  to 
the  lower  part  of  the  triangular  surface  at  the  root  of  the  spine  of  the  scapula; 
below  ^o  the  inferior  angle,  the  arch  being  connected  to  the  vertebral  border  by  a 
thin  membrane.  When  the  arch  extends,  as  it  occasionally  does,  only  a  short 
distance,  the  muscular  fibers  are  inserted  directly  into  the  scapula. 

The  Rhomboideus  minor  (Fig.  409)  arises  from  the  lower  part  of  the  ligamentum 
nuchse  and  from  the  spinous  processes  of  the  seventh  cervical  and  first  thoracic 
vertebrae.  It  is  inserted  into  the  base  of  the  triangular  smooth  surface  at  the  root 
of  the  spine  of  the  scapula,  and  is  usually  separated  from  the  Rhomboideus  major 


■■^^P  MUSCLES  OF  THE  UPPER  EXTREMITY  435 

by  a  slight  interval,  but  the  adjacent  margins  of  the  two  muscles  are  occasionally 
united. 

Variations. — The  vertebral  and  scapular  attachments  of  the  two  muscles  vary  in  extent.  A 
small  slip  from  the  scapula  to  the  occipital  bone  close  to  the  minor  occasionally  occurs,  the  Rhom- 
boideus  occipitalis  muscle. 

The  Levator  scapulae*  (Levator  anguli  scapulce)  (Fig.  409)  is  situated  at  the 
back  and  side  of  the  neck.  It  arises  by  tendinous  slips  from  the  transverse  pro- 
cesses of  the  atlas  and  axis  and  from  the  posterior  tubercles  of  the  transverse 
processes  of  the  third  and  fourth  cervical  vertebrae.  It  is  inserted  into  the  verte- 
bral border  of  the  scapula,  between  the  medial  angle  and  the  triangular  smooth 
surface  at  the  root  of  the  spine. 

Variations.— The  number  of  vertebral  attachments  varies;  a  slip  may  extend  to  the  occipital  or 
mastoid,  to  the  Trapezius,  Scalene  or  Serratus  anterior,  or  to  the  first  or  second  rib.  The  muscle 
may  be  subdivided  into  several  distinct  parts  from  origin  to  insertion.  Levator  claviculce  from  the 
transverse  processes  of  one  or  two  upper  cervical  vertebrae  to  the  outer  end  of  the  clavicle  corre- 
sponds to  a  muscle  of  lower  animals.    More  or  less  union  with  the  Serratus  anterior. 

Nerves. — The  Rhomboidei  are  supplied  by  the  dorsal  scapular  nerve  from  the  fifth  cervical; 
the  Levator  scapula?  by  the  third  and  fourth  cervical  nerves,  and  frequently  by  a  branch  from 
the  dorsal  scapular. 

Actions. — The  movements  effected  by  the  preceding  muscles  are  numerous,  as  may  be  con- 
ceived from  their  extensive  attachments.  When  the  whole  Trapezius  is  in  action  it  retracts  the 
scapula  and  braces  back  the  shoulder;  if  the  head  be  fixed,  the  upper  part  of  the  muscle  will  elevate 
the  point  of  the  shoulder,  as  in  supporting  weights;  when  the  lower  fibers  contract  they  assist 
in  depressing  the  scapula.  The  middle  and  lower  fibers  of  the  muscle  rotate  the  scapula,  causing 
elevation  of  the  acromion.  If  the  shoulders  be  fixed,  the  Trapezii,  acting  together,  will  draw 
the  head  directly  backward;  or  if  only  one  act,  the  head  is  drawn  to  the  corresponding  side. 

When  the  Latissimus  dorsi  acts  upon  the  humerus,  it  depresses  and  draws  it  backward,  and 
at  the  same  time  rotates  it  inward.  It  is  the  muscle  which  is  principally  employed  in  giving  a 
downward  blow,  as  in  felling  a  tree  or  jn  sabre  practice.  If  the  arm  be  fixed,  the  muscle  may 
act  in  various  ways  upon  the  trunk;  thus,  it  may  raise  the  lower  ribs  and  assist  in  forcible  inspira- 
tion; or,  if  both  arms  be  fixed,  the  two  muscles  may  assist  the  abdominal  muscles  and  Pectorales 
in  suspending  and  drawing  the  trunk  forward,  as  in  cUmbing. 

If  the  head  be  fixed,  the  Levator  scapula;  raises  the  medial  angle  of  the  scapula;  if  the  shoulder 
be  fixed,  the  muscle  inclines  the  neck  to  the  corresponding  side  and  rotates  it  in  the  same  direc- 
tion. The  Rhomboidei  carry  the  inferior  angle  backward  and  upward,  thus  producing  a  shght 
rotation  of  the  scapula  upon  the  side  of  the  chest,  the  Rhomboideus  major  acting  especially  on 
the  inferior  angle  of  the  scapula,  through  the  tendinous  arch  by  which  it  is  inserted.  The  Rhom- 
boidei, acting  together  with  the  middle  and  inferior  fibers  of  the  Trapezius,  will  retract  the 
scapula.  4) 

n.     THE   MUSCLES   CONNECTING   THE   UPPER   EXTREMITY   TO    THE 
ANTERIOR    AND   LATERAL   THORACIC   WALLS. 

The  muscles  of  the  anterior  and  lateral  thoracic  regions  are: 

Pectoralis  major.  Subclavius. 

Pectoralis  minor.  Serratus  anterior. 

Superficial  Fascia.— The  superficial  fascia  of  the  anterior  thoracic  region  is  con- 
tinuous with  that  of  the  neck  and  upper  extremity  above,  and  of  the  abdomen 
below.  It  encloses  the  mamma  and  gives  off  numerous  septa  which  pass  into  the 
gland,  supporting  its  various  lobes.  From  the  fascia  over  the  front  of  the  mamma, 
fibrous  processes  pass  forward  to  the  integument  and  papilla;  these  were  called 
by  Sir  A.  Cooper  the  ligamenta  suspensoria. 

Pectoral  Fascia. — The  pectoral  fascia  is  a  thin  lamina,  covering  the  surface  of 
the  Pectoralis  major,  and  sending  numerous  prolongations  between  its  fasciculi: 
it  is  attached,  in  the  middle  line,  to  the  front  of  the  sternum;  above,  to  the  clavicle; 
laterally  and  below  it  is  continuous  with  the  fascia  of  the  shoulder,  axilla,  and 
thorax.    It  is  very  thin  over  the  upper  part  of  the  Pectoralis  major,  but  thicker 


436 


MYOLOGY 


in  the  interval  between  it  and  the  Latissimus  dorsi,  where  it  closes  in  the  axillarjf 
space  and  forms  the  axillary  fascia ;  it  divides  at  the  lateral  margin  of  the  Latis- 
simus dorsi  into  two  layers,  one  of  which  passes  in  front  of,  and  the  other  behind 
it;  these  proceed  as  far  as  the  spinous  processes  of  the  thoracic  vertebrae,  to  which 
they  are  attached.  As  the  fascia  leaves  the  lower  edge  of  the  Pectoralis  major  to  cross 
the  floor  of  the  axilla  it  sends  a  layer  upward  under  cover  of  the  muscle;  this  lamina 
splits  to  envelop  the  Pectoralis  minor,  at  the  upper  edge  of  which  it  is  continuous 
with  the  coracoclavicular  fascia.  The  hollow  of  the  armpit,  seen  when  the  arm 
is  abducted,  is  produced  mainly  by  the  traction  of  this  fascia  on  the  axillary  floor, 
and  hence  the  lamina  is  sometimes  named  the  suspensory  ligament  of  the  axilla. 
At  the  lower  part  of  the  thoracic  region  the  deep  fascia  is  well-developed,  and  is 
continuous  with  the  fibrous  sheaths  of  the  Recti  abdominis. 


n 


Fia.  410. — Superficial  muscles  of  the  chest  and  front  of  the  arm.  m 

The  Pectoralis  major  (Fig.  410)  is  a  thick,  fan-shaped  muscle,  situated  at  the 
upper  and  forepart  of  the  chest.  It  arises  from  the  anterior  surface  of  the  sternal 
half  of  the  clavicle;  from  half  the  breadth  of  the  anterior  surface  of  the  sternum, 
as  low  down  as  the  attachment  of  the  cartilage  of  the  sixth  or  seventh  rib ;  from  the 


I 


MUSCLES  OF  THE  UPPER  EXTREMITY  437 

cartilages  of  all  the  true  ribs,  with  the  exception,  frequently,  of  the  jBrst  or  seventh, 
or  both,  and  from  the  aponeurosis  of  the  Obliquus  externus  abdominis.  From  this 
extensive  origin  the  fibers  converge  toward  their  insertion;  those  arising  from  the 
clavicle  pass  obliquely  downward  and  lateralward,  and  are  usually  separated  from 
the  rest  by  a  slight  interval;  those  from  the  lower  part  of  the  sternum,  and  the 
cartilages  of  the  lower  true  ribs,  run  upward  and  lateralward;  while  the  middle 
fibers  pass  horizontally.  They  all  end  in  a  flat  tendon,  about  5  cm.  broad,  w^hich 
is  inserted  into  the  crest  of  the  greater  tubercle  of  the  humerus.  This  tendon  con- 
l^psists  of  two  laminae,  placed  one  in  front  of  the  other,  and  usually  blended  together 
^^^below.  The  anterior  lamina,  the  thicker,  receives  the  clavicular  and  the  uppermost 
sternal  fibers;  they  are  inserted  in  the  same  order  as  that  in  which  they  arise: 
that  is  to  say,  the  most  lateral  of  the  clavicular  fibers  are  inserted  at  the  upper 
part  of  the  anterior  lamina;  the  uppermost  sternal  fibers  pass  down  to  the  lower 
part  of  the  lamina  which  extends  as  low  as  the  tendon  of  the  Deltoideus  and  joins 
with  it.  The  posterior  lamina  of  the  tendon  receives  the  attachment  of  the  greater 
part  of  the  sternal  portion  and  the  deep  fibers,  i.  e.,  those  from  the  costal  cartilages. 
These  deep  fibers,  and  particularly  those  from  the  lower  costal  cartilages,  ascend 

I^_  the  higher,  turning  backward  successively  behind  the  superficial  and  upper  ones, 
^Bso  that  the  tendon  appears  to  be  twisted.  The  posterior  lamina  reaches  higher 
on  the  humerus  than  the  anterior  one,  and  from  it  an  expansion  is  given  off  which 
covers  the  intertubercular  groove  and  blends  with  the  capsule  of  the  shoulder- 
joint.  From  the  deepest  fibers  of  this  lamina  at  its  insertion  an  expansion  is  given 
off  which  lines  the  intertubercular  groove,  while  from  the  lower  border  of  the  tendon 
a  third  expansion  passes  downward  to  the  fascia  of  the  arm. 

I^B     Variations. — The  more  frequent  variations  are  greater  or  less  extent  of  attachment  to  the  ribs 
I  ^m  and  sternum,  varying  size  of  the  abdominal  part  or  its  absence,  greater  or  less  extent  of  separation 

of  sternocostal  and  clavicular  parts,  fusion  of  clavicular  part  with  deltoid,  decussation  in  front  of 

the  sternum.     Deficiency  or  absence  of  the  sternocostal  part  is  not  uncommon.     Absence  of  the 

clavicular  part  is  less  frequent.    Rarely  the  whole  muscle  is  wanting. 

Costocoracaideus  is  a  muscular  band  occasionally  found  arising  from  the  ribs  or  aponeurosis  of  the 

External  oblique  between  the  Pectoralis  major  and  Latissimus  dorsi  and  inserted  into  the  coracoid 

process. 

Chondro-epitrochlearis  is  a  muscular  slip  occasionally  found  arising  from  the  costal  cartilages  or 

from  the  aponeurosis  of  the  External  oblique  below  the  Pectoralis  major  or  from  the  Pectoralis 

major  itself.    The  insertion  is  variable  on  the  inner  side  of  the  arm  to  fascia,  intermuscular  septum 

or  internal  condyle. 

ISternalis,  in  front  of  the  sternal  end  of  the  Pectoralis  major  parallel  to  the  margin  of  the  sterniun. 
It  is  supplied  by  the  anterior  thoracic  nerves  and  is  probably  a  misplaced  part  of  the  pectoralis. 
Coracoclavicular  Fascia  {fascia  cora^oclavicularis;  costocoracoid  membrane;  clavi- 
pedoral  fascia). — The  coracoclavicular  fascia  is  a  strong  fascia  situated  under 
cover  of  the  clavicular  portion  of  the  Pectoralis  major.    It  occupies  the  interval 
between  the  Pectoralis  minor  and  Subclavius,  and  protects  the  axillary  vessels 
^H  and  nerves.    Traced  upward,  it  splits  to  enclose  the  Subclavius,  and  its  two  layers 
^fare  attached  to  the  clavicle,  one  in  front  of  and  the  other  behind  the  muscle;  the 
latter  layer  fuses  with  the  deep  cervical  fascia  and  with  the  sheath  of  the  axillary 
,  vessels.     Medially,  it'  blends  with  the  fascia  covering  the  first  two  intercostal 
spaces,  and  is  attached  also  to  the  first  rib  medial  to  the  origin  of  the  Subclavius. 
"^Laterally,  it  is  very  thick  and  dense,  and  is  attached  to  the  coracoid  process. 
The  portion  extending  from  the  first  rib  to  the  coracoid  process  is  often  whiter  and 
denser  than  the  rest,  and  is  sometimes  called  the  costocoracoid  ligament.    Below 
this  it  is  thin,  and  at  the  upper  border  of  the  Pectoralis  minor  it  splits  into  two 
layers  to  invest  the  muscle;  from  the  lower  border  of  the  Pectoralis  minOr  it  is 
continued  downward  to  join  the  axillary  fascia,  and  lateralward  to  join  the  fascia 
over  the  short  head  of  the  Biceps  brachii.    The  coracoclavicular  fascia  is  pierced 
by  the  cephalic  vein,  thoracoacromial  artery  and  vein,  and  external  anterior 
thoracic  nerve. 


438 


MYOLOGY 


The  Pectoralis  minor  (Fig.  411)  is  a  thin,  triangular  muscle,  situated  at  the 
upper  part  of  the  thorax,  beneath  the  Pectoralis  major.  It  arises  from  the  upper 
margins  and  outer  surfaces  of  the  third,  fourth,  and  fifth  ribs,  near  their  cartilage 
and  from  the  aponeuroses  covering  the  Intercostalis;  the  fibers  pass  upward  and 
lateralward  and  converge  to  form  a  flat  tendon,  which  is  inserted  into  the  medial 
border  and  upper  surface  of  the  coracoid  process  of  the  scapula. 

Variations. — Origin  from  second,  third  and  fourth  or  fifth  ribs.  The  tendon  of  insertion  may 
extend  over  the  coracoid  process  to  the  greater  tubercle.  May  be  split  into  several  parts.  Absence 
rare. 

Pectoralis  minimus,  first  rib-cartilage  to  coracoid  process.     Rare. 


Badius 
Fig.  411. — Deep  musclea  of  the  chest  and  front  of  the  arm,  with  the  boundariea  of  the  axilla. 

The  Subclavius  (Fig.  411)  is  a  small  triangular  muscle,  placed  between  the 
clavicle  and  the  first  rib.  It  arises  by  a  short,  thick  tendon  from  the  first  rib  and 
its  cartilage  at  their  junction,  in  front  of  the  costoclavicular  ligament;  the  fleshy 
fibers  proceed  obliquely  upward  and  lateralward,  to  be  inserted  into  the  groove 
on  the  under  surface  of  the  clavicle  between  the  costoclavicular  and  conoid 
ligaments. 

Variations. — Insertion  into  coracoid  process  instead  of  clavicle  or  into  both  clavicle  and  coracoid 
process.  Sternoscapular  fasciculus  to  the  upper  border  of  scapula.  Sternoclavicularis  from  manu- 
brium to  clavicle  between  Pectoralis  major  and  coracoclavicular  fascia. 

The  Serratus  anterior  {Serratus  magnus)  (Fig.  411)  is  a  thin  muscular  sheet, 
situated   between  the   ribs   and   the  scapula  at   the  upper  and  lateral  part  of 


1^ 


■s 


THE  MUSCLES  AND  FASCIA  OF  THE  SHOULDER  439 

tne  chest.  It  arises  by  fleshy  digitations  from  the  outer  surfaces  and  superior 
borders  of  the  upper  eight  or  nine  ribs,  and  from  the  aponeuroses  covering  the 
intervening  Intercostales.  Each  digitation  (except  the  first)  arises  from  the 
corresponding  rib ;  the  first  sprjngs  from  the  first  and  second  ribs ;  and  from  the  fascia 
covering  the  first  intercostal  space.  From  this  extensive  attachment  the  fibers 
pass  backward,  closely  applied  to  the  chest-wall,  and  reach  the  vertebral  border 
pf  the  scapula,  and  are  inserted  into  its  ventral  surface  in  the  following  manner, 
he  first  digitation  is  inserted  into  a  triangular  area  on  the  ventral  surface  of  the 
tnedial  angle.  The  next  two  digitations  spread  out  to  form  a  thin,  triangular 
sheet,  the  base  of  which  is  directed  backward  and  is  inserted  into  nearly  the  whole 
length  of  the  ventral  surface  of  the  vertebral  border.  The  low^er  five  or  six  digita- 
tions converge  to  form  a  fan-shaped  mass,  the  apex  of  which  is  inserted,  by  muscular 
and  tendinous  fibers,  into  a  triangular  impression  on  the  ventral  surface  of  the 
inferior  angle.  The  lower  four  slips  interdigitate  at  their  origins  with  the  upper 
five  slips  of  the  Obliquus  externus  abdominis. 


Variations. — ^Attachment  to  tenth  rib.  Absence  of  attachments  to  first  rib,  to  one  or  more  of 
he  lower  ribs.  Division  into  three  parts;  absence  or  defect  of  middle  part.  Union  with  Levator 
scapulae,  External  intercostals  or  External  oblique. 

Nerves. — The  Pectoralis  major  is  suppUed  by  the  medial  and  lateral  anterior  thoracic  nerves; 
through  these  nerves  the  muscle  receives  filaments  from  all  the  spinal  nerves  entering  into  the 
formation  of  the  brachial  plexus;  the  Pectoralis  minor  receives  its  fibers  from  the  eighth  cervical 
and  first  thoracic  nerves  through  the  medial  anterior  thoracic  nerve.  The  Subclavius  is  suplied 
by  a  filament  from  the  fifth  and  sixth  cervical  nerves;  the  Serratus  anterior  is  supplied  by  the 
long  thoracic,  which  is  derived  from  the  fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  cervical  nerves. 

Actions. — If  the  arm  has  been  raised  by  the  Deltoideus,  the  Pectorahs  major  will,  conjointly 
with  the  Latissimus  dorsi  and  Teres  major,  depress  it  to  the  side  of  the  chest.  If  acting  alone, 
it  adducts  and  draws  forward  the  arm,  bringing  it  across  the  front  of  the  chest,  and  at  the  same 
time  rotates  it  inward.  The  Pectoralis  minor  depresses  the  point  of  the  shoulder,  drawing  the 
scapula  downward  and  medialward  toward  the  thorax,  and  throwing  the  inferior  angle  back- 
ward. The  Subclavius  depresses  the  shoulder,  carrying  it  downward  and  forward.  When  the 
arms  are  fixed,  all  three  of  these  muscles  act  upon  the  ribs;  drawing  them  upward  and  expand- 
ing the  chest,  and  thus  becoming  very  important  agents  in  forced  inspiration.  The  Serratus 
anterior,  as  a  whole,  carries  the  scapula  forward,  and  at  the  same  time  raises  the  vertebral  border 
of  the  bone.  It  is  therefore  concerned  in  the  action  of  pushing.  Its  lower  and  stronger  fibers 
move  forward  the  lower  angle  and  assist  the  Trapezius  in  rotating  the  bone  at  the  sternoclavicular 
joint,  and  thus  assist  this  muscle  in  raising  the  acromion  and  supporting  weights  upon  the  shoulder. 
It  is  also  an  assistant  to  the  Deltoideus  in  raising  the  arm,  inasmuch  as  during  the  action  of  this 
latter  muscle  it  fixes  the  scapula  and  so  steadies  the  glenoid  cavity  on  which  the  head  of  the 
humerus  rotates.  After  the  Deltoideus  has  raised  the  arm  to  a  right  angle  with  the  trunk,  the 
Serratus  anterior  and  the  Trapezius,  by  rotating  the  scapula,  raise  the  arm  into  an  almost  vertical 
position.  It  is  possible  that  when  the  shoulders  are  fixed  the  lower  fibers  of  the  Serratus  anterior 
may  assist  in  raising  and  everting  the  ribs;  but  it  is  not  the  important  inspiratory  muscle  it  was 
formerly  beheved  to  be 


in.     THE   MUSCLES    AND    FASCMl   OF   THE   SHOULDER. 


I  In  this  group  are  included: 

Deltoideus.  Infraspinatus. 

Subscapularis.  Teres  minor. 

Supraspinatus.  Teres  major. 

Deep  Fascia. — The  deep  fascia  covering  the  Deltoideus  invests  the  muscle,  and 
sends  numerous  septa  between  its  fasciculi.  In  front  it  is  continuous  with  the  fascia 
covering  the  Pectoralis  major;  behind,  where  it  is  thick  and  strong,  with  that 
covering  the  Infraspinatus;  above,  it  is  attached  to  the  clavicle,  the  acromion, 
and  the  spine  of  the  scapula;  below,  it  is  continuous  with  the  deep  fascia  of  the 
arm. 

The  Deltoideus  {Deltoid  muscle)  (Fig.  410)  is  a  large,  thick,  triangular  muscle,  which 
covers  the  shoulder- joint  in  front,  behind,  and  laterally.    It  arises  from  the  anterior 

/ 


440  MYOLOGY 


I 


border  and  upper  surface  of  the  lateral  third  of  the  clavicle;  from  the  lateral  margm 
and  upper  surface  of  the  acromion,  and  from  the  lower  lip  of  the  posterior  border 
of  the  spine  of  the  scapula,  as  far  back  as  the  triangular  surface  at  its  medial  end.iH 
From  this  extensive  origin  the  fibers  converge  toward  their  insertion,  the  middle-™ 
passing  vertically,  the  anterior  obliquely  backward  and  lateralward,  the  posterior 
obliquely  forward  and  lateralward;  they  unite  in  a  thick  tendon,  which  is  inserted 
into  the  deltoid  prominence  on  the  middle  of  the  lateral  side  of  the  body  of  the 
humerus.  At  its  insertion  the  muscle  gives  off  an  expansion  to  the  deep  fascia  of 
the  arm.  This  muscle  is  remarkably  coarse  in  texture,  and  the  arrangement  of 
its  fibers  is  somewhat  peculiar;  the  central  portion  of  the  muscle — that  is  to  say, 
the  part  arising  from  the  acromion — consists  of  oblique  fibers;  these  arise  in  a 
bipenniform  manner  from  the  sides  of  the  tendinous  intersections,  generally  four 
in  number,  which  are  attached  above  to  the  acromion  and  pass  downward  parallel 
to  one  another  in  the  substance  of  the  muscle.  The  oblique  fibers  thus  formed  are 
inserted  into  similar  tendinous  intersections,  generally  three  in  number,  which 
pass  upward  from  the  insertion  of  the  muscle  and  alternate  with  the  descending 
septa.  The  portions  of  the  muscle  arising  from  the  clavicle  and  spine  of  the  scapula 
are  not  arranged  in  this  manner,  but  are  inserted  into  the  margins  of  the  inferior 
tendon. 

Variations. — Large  variations  uncommon.  More  or  less  splitting  common.  Continuation  into 
the  Trapezius;  fusion  with  the  Pectoralis  major;  additional  slips  from  the  vertebral  border  of  the 
scapula,  infraspinous  fascia  and  axillary  border  of  scapula  not  uncommon.  Insertion  varies  in 
extent  or  rarely  is  prolonged  to  origin  of  Brachioradialis. 

Nerves. — The  Deltoideus  is  suppUed  by  the  fifth  and  sixth  cervical  through  the  axillary  nerve. 

Actions. — The  Deltoideus  raises  the  arm  from  the  side,  so  as  to  bring  it  at  right  angles  with 
the  trunk.  Its  anterior  fibers,  assisted  by  the  Pectoralis  major,  draw  the  arm  forward;  and  its 
posterior  fibers,  aided  by  the  Teres  major  and  Latissimus  dorsi,  draw  it  backward. 

Subscapular  Fascia  (fascia  subscapularis) . — The  subscapular  fascia  is  a  thin 
membrane  attached  to  the  entire  circumference  of  the  subscapular  fossa,  and 
affording  attachment  by  its  deep  surface  to  some  of  the  fibers  of  the  Sub- 
scapularis. 

The  Subscapularis  (Fig.  411)  is  a  large  triangular  muscle  which  fills  the  sub- 
scapular fossa,  and  arises  from  its  medial  two-thirds  and  from  the  lower  two- 
thirds  of  the  groove  on  the  axillary  border  of  the  bone.  Some  fibers  arise  from 
tendinous  laminae  which  intersect  the  muscle  and  are  attached  to  ridges  on  the 
bone;  others  from  an  aponeurosis,  which  separates  the  muscle  from  the  Teres 
major  and  the  long  head  of  the  Triceps  brachii.  The  fibers  pass  lateralward, 
and,  gradually  converging,  end  in  a  tendon  which  is  inserted  into  the  lesser  tubercle 
of  the  humerus  and  the  front  of  the  capsule  of  the  shoulder-joint.  The  tendon 
of  the  muscle  is  separated  from  the  neck  of  the  scapula  by  a  large  bursa,  which 
communicates  with  the  cavity  of  the  shoulder-joint  through  an  aperture  in  the 
capsule. 

Nerves. — The  Subscapularis  is  supplied  by  the  fifth  and  sixth  cervical  nerves  through  the 
upper  and  lower  subscapular  nerves. 

Actions. — The  Subscapularis  rotates  the  head  of  the  humerus  inward;  when  the  arm  is  raised, 
it  draws  the  humerus  forward  and  downward.  It  is  a  powerful  defence  to  the  front  of  the  shoulder- 
joint,  preventing  displacement  of  the  head  of  the  humerus. 

Supraspinatous  Fascia  (fascia  supraspinata) . — ^The  supraspinatous  fascia  com- 
pletes the  osseofibrous  case  in  which  the  Supraspinatus  muscle  is  contained;  it 
affords  attachment,  by  its  deep  surface,  to  some  of  the  fibers  of  the  muscle.  It  is 
thick  medially,  but  thinner  laterally  under  the  coracoacromial  ligament. 

The  Supraspinatus  (Fig.  412)  occupies  the  whole  of  the  supraspinatous  fossa, 
arising  from  its  medial  two-thirds,  and  from  the  strong  supraspinatous  fascia. 
The  muscular  fibers  converge  to  a  tendon,  which  crosses  the  upper  part  of  the 


I 


THE  MUSCLES  AND  FASCIA  OF  THE  SHOULDER 


441 


fder-joint,  and  is  inserted  into  the  highest  of  the  three  impressions  on  the 
greater  tubercle  of  the  humerus;  the  tendon  is  intimately  adherent  to  the  capsule 
of  the  shoulder-joint. 

Infraspinatous  Fascia  (fascia  infraspinata). — The  infraspinatous  fascia  is  a  dense 
fibrous  membrane,  covering  the  Infraspinatous  muscle  and  fixed  to  the  circumfer- 
ence of  the  infraspinatous  fossa;  it  affords  attachment,  by  its  deep  surface,  to  some 
fibers  of  that  muscle.  It  is  intimately  attached  to  the  deltoid  fascia  along  the  over- 
lapping border  of  the  Deltoideus. 


Fig.  412. — Muscles  on  the  dorsum  of  the  scapula,  and  the  Triceps  brachii. 

The  Infraspinatus  (Fig.  412)  is  a  thick  triangular  muscle,  which  occupies  the 
chief  part  of  the  infraspinatous  fossa;  it  arises  by  fleshy  fibers  from  its  medial  two- 
thirds,  and  by  tendinous  fibers  from  the  ridges  on  its  surface;  it  also  arises  from 
the  infraspinatous  fascia  which  covers  it,  and  separates  it  from  the  Teretes  major 
and  minor.  The  fibers  converge  to  a  tendon,  which  glides  over  the  lateral  border 
of  the  spine  of  the  scapula,  and,  passing  across  the  posterior  part  of  the  capsule  of 
the  shoulder-joint,  is  inserted  into  the  middle  impression  on  the  greater  tubercle 
of  the  humerus.  The  tendon  of  this  muscle  is  sometimes  separated  from  the 
capsule  of  the  shoulder-joint  by  a  bursa,  which  may  communicate  with  the  joint 
cavity. 

The  Teres  minor  (Fig,  412)  is  a  narrow,  elongated  muscle,  which  arises  from 
the  dorsal  surface  of  the  axillary  border  of  the  scapula  for  the  upper  two-thirds  of 
its  extent,  and  from  two  aponeurotic  laminae,  one  of  which  separates  it  from  the 
Infraspinatus,  the  other  from  the  Teres  major.  Its  fibers  run  obliquely  upward 
and  lateralward;  the  upper  ones  end  in  a  tendon  which  is  inserted  into  the  lowest 
of  the  three  impressions  on  the  greater  tubercle  of  the  humerus;  the  lowest  fibers 
are  inserted  directly  into  the  humerus  immediately  below  this  impression.    The 


442  MYOLOGY 

tendon  of  this  muscle  passes  across,  and  is  united  with,  the  posterior  part  of 
capsule  of  the  shoulder-joint. 

Variations. — It  is  sometimes  inseparable  from  the  Infraspinatus. 

The  Teres  major  (Fig.  412)  is  a  thick  but  somewhat  flattened  muscle,  which 
arises  from  the  oval  area  on  the  dorsal  surface  of  the  inferior  angle  of  the  scapula, 
and  from  the  fibrous  septa  interposed  between  the  muscle  and  the  Teres  minor 
and  Infraspinatus;  the  fibers  are  directed  upward  and  lateralward,  and  end  in  a 
flat  tendon,  about  5  cm.  long,  which  is  inserted  into  the  crest  of  the  lesser  tubercle 
of  the  humerus.  The  tendon,  at  its  insertion,  lies  behind  that  of  the  Latissimus 
dorsi,  from  which  it  is  separated  by  a  bursa,  the  two  tendons  being,  however, 
united  along  their  lower  borders  for  a  short  distance. 

Nerves. — The  Supraspinatus  and  Infraspinatus  are  suppUed  by  the  fifth  and  sixth  cervical 
nerves  through  the  suprascapular  nerve;  the  Teres  minor,  by  the  fifth  cervical,  through  the 
axillary;  and  the  Teres  major,  by  the  fifth  and  sixth  cervical,  through  the  lowest  subscapular. 

Actions. — The  Supraspinatus  assists  the  Deltoideus  in  raising  the  arm  from  the  side  of  the 
trunk  and  fixes  the  head  of  the  humerus  in  the  glenoid  cavity.  The  Infraspinatus  and  Teres 
minor  rotate  the  head  of  the  humerus  outward;  they  also  assist  in  carrying  the  arm  backward. 
One  of  the  most  important  uses  of  these  three  muscles  is  to  protect  the  shoulder-joint,  the  Supra- 
spinatus supporting  it  above,  and  the  Infraspinatus  and  Teres  minor  behind.  The  Teres  major 
assists  the  Latissimus  dorsi  in  drawing  the  previously  raised  humerus  downward  and  backward, 
and  in  rotating  it  inward;  when  the  arm  is  fixed  it  may  assist  the  Pectorales  and  th^  Latissimus 
dorsi  in  drawing  the  trunk  forward. 


IV.    THE   MUSCLES    AND   FASCLffl   OF   THE    ARM. 

The  muscles  of  the  arm  are: 

Coracobrachialis.  Brachialis. 

Biceps  brachii.  Triceps  brachii. 

Brachial  Fascia  (fascia  brachii;  deep  fascia  of  the  arm) . — The  brachial  fascia  is 
continuous  with  that  covering  the  Deltoideus  and  the  Pectoralis  major,  by  means 
of  which  it  is  attached,  above,  to  the  clavicle,  acromion,  and  spine  of  the  scapula; 
it  forms  a  thin,  loose,  membranous  sheath  for  the  muscles  of  the  arm,  and  sends 
septa  between  them ;  it  is  composed  of  fibers  disposed  in  a  circular  or  spiral  direc- 
tion, and  connected  together  by  vertical  and  oblique  fibers.  It  differs  in  thickness 
at  different  parts,  being  thin  over  the  Biceps  brachii,  but  thicker  where  it  covers 
the  Triceps  brachii,  and  over  the  epicondyles  of  the  humerus:  it  is  strengthened 
by  fibrous  aponeuroses,  derived  from  the  Pectoralis  major  and  Latissimus  dorsi 
