
RECORD muscle_sternocleidomastoid
OCR lines 30747-30802

The  Stemocleidomastoideus  (Sternomastoid  muscle)  (Fig.  385)  passes  obliquely 
across  the  side  of  the  neck.  It  is  thick  and  narrow  at  its  central  part,  but  broader 
and  thinner  at  either  end.  It  arises  from  the  sternum  and  clavicle  by  two  heads. 
The  medial  or  sternal  head  is  a  rounded  fasciculus,  tendinous  in  front,  fleshy  behind, 
which  arises  from  the  upper  part  of  the  anterior  surface  of  the  manubrium  sterni, 
and  is  directed  upward,  lateralward,  and  backward.  The  lateral  or  clavicular  head, 
composed  of  fleshy  and  aponeurotic  fibers,  arises  from  the  superior  border  and 
anterior  surface  of  the  medial  third  of  the  clavicle;  it  is  directed  almost  vertically 
upward.  The  two  heads  are  separated  from  one  another  at  their  origins  by  a 
triangular  interval,  but  gradually  blend,  below  the  middle  of  the  neck,  into  a  thick, 
rounded  muscle  which  is  inserted,  by  a  strong  tendon,  into  the  lateral  surface  of 
the  mastoid  process,  from  its  apex  to  its  superior  border,  and  by  a  thin  aponeurosis 
into  the  lateral  half  of  the  superior  nuchal  line  of  the  occipital  bone. 

Variations. — The  Stemocleidomastoideus  varies  much  in  the  extent  of  its  origin  from  the  clavicle: 
in  some  cases  the  clavicular  head  may  be  as  narrow  as  the  sternal;  in  others  it  may  be  as  much 
as  7.5  cm.  in  breadth.  When  the  clavicular  origin  is  broad,  it  is  occasionally  subdivided  into 
several  slips,  separated  by  narrow  intervals.  More  rarely,  the  adjoining  margins  of  the  Stemo- 
cleidomastoideus and  Trapezius  have  been  found  in  contact.  The  Supraclavicularis  muscle  arises 
from  the  manubrium  behind  the  Stemocleidomastoideus  and  passes  behind  the  Stemocleido- 
mastoideus to  the  upper  surface  of  the  clavicle. 

Triangles  of  the  Neck. — This  muscle  divides  the  quadrilateral  area  of  the  side  of  the  neck 
into  two  triangles,  an  anterior  and  a  posterior.  The  boundaries  of  the  anterior  triangle  are,  in 
front,  the  median  line  of  the  neck;  above,  the  lower  border  of  the  body  of  the  mandible,  and  an 
imaginary  line  drawn  from  the  angle  of  the  mandible  to  the  Stemocleidomastoideus;  behind, 
the  anterior  border  of  the  Stemocleidomastoideus.     The  apex  of  the  triangle  is  at  the  upper 

1  F.  G.  Parsons  (Journal  of  Anatomy  and  Physiology,  vol._xliv)_  regards  the  carotid  sheath  and  the  fascial  planes 
in  the  neck  as  structures  which  are  artificially  produced  by  dissection. 


THE  SUPRA-  AND  INFRAHYOID  MUSCLES 


391 


border  of  the  sternum.  The  boundaries  of  the  posterior  triangle  are,  in  front,  the  posterior  borcler 
of  the  Sternocleidomastoideus;  below,  the  middle  third  of  the  clavicle;  behind,  the  anterior  margin 
of  the  Trapezius.  The  apex  corresponds  with  the  meeting  of  the  Sternocleidomastoideus  and 
Trapezius  on  the  occipital  bone.  The  anatomy  of  these  triangles  will  be  more  fully  described 
with  that  of  the  vessels  of  the  neck  (p.  562). 

Nerves. — The  Sternocleidomastoideus  is  suppMed  by  the  accessory  nerve  and  branches  from 
the  anterior  divisions  of  the  second  and  third  cervical  nerves. 

Actions. — When  only  one  Sternocleidomastoideus  acts,  it  draws  the  head  toward  the  shoulder 
of  the  same  side,  assisted  by  the  Splenius  and  the  Obliquus  capitis  inferior  of  the  opposite  side. 
At  the  same  time  it  rotates  the  head  so  as  to  carry  the  face  toward  the  opposite  side.  Acting 
together  from  their  sternoclavicular  attachments  the  muscles  will  flex  the  cervical  part  of  the 
vertebral  column.  If  the  head  be  fixed,  the  two  muscles  assist  in  elevating  the  thorax  in  forced 
inspiration. 



RECORD muscle_deltoid_middle
OCR lines 33700-33742
The  Deltoideus  {Deltoid  muscle)  (Fig.  410)  is  a  large,  thick,  triangular  muscle,  which 
covers  the  shoulder- joint  in  front,  behind,  and  laterally.    It  arises  from  the  anterior 

/ 


440  MYOLOGY 


I 


border  and  upper  surface  of  the  lateral  third  of  the  clavicle;  from  the  lateral  margm 
and  upper  surface  of  the  acromion,  and  from  the  lower  lip  of  the  posterior  border 
of  the  spine  of  the  scapula,  as  far  back  as  the  triangular  surface  at  its  medial  end.iH 
From  this  extensive  origin  the  fibers  converge  toward  their  insertion,  the  middle-™ 
passing  vertically,  the  anterior  obliquely  backward  and  lateralward,  the  posterior 
obliquely  forward  and  lateralward;  they  unite  in  a  thick  tendon,  which  is  inserted 
into  the  deltoid  prominence  on  the  middle  of  the  lateral  side  of  the  body  of  the 
humerus.  At  its  insertion  the  muscle  gives  off  an  expansion  to  the  deep  fascia  of 
the  arm.  This  muscle  is  remarkably  coarse  in  texture,  and  the  arrangement  of 
its  fibers  is  somewhat  peculiar;  the  central  portion  of  the  muscle — that  is  to  say, 
the  part  arising  from  the  acromion — consists  of  oblique  fibers;  these  arise  in  a 
bipenniform  manner  from  the  sides  of  the  tendinous  intersections,  generally  four 
in  number,  which  are  attached  above  to  the  acromion  and  pass  downward  parallel 
to  one  another  in  the  substance  of  the  muscle.  The  oblique  fibers  thus  formed  are 
inserted  into  similar  tendinous  intersections,  generally  three  in  number,  which 
pass  upward  from  the  insertion  of  the  muscle  and  alternate  with  the  descending 
septa.  The  portions  of  the  muscle  arising  from  the  clavicle  and  spine  of  the  scapula 
are  not  arranged  in  this  manner,  but  are  inserted  into  the  margins  of  the  inferior 
tendon. 

Variations. — Large  variations  uncommon.  More  or  less  splitting  common.  Continuation  into 
the  Trapezius;  fusion  with  the  Pectoralis  major;  additional  slips  from  the  vertebral  border  of  the 
scapula,  infraspinous  fascia  and  axillary  border  of  scapula  not  uncommon.  Insertion  varies  in 
extent  or  rarely  is  prolonged  to  origin  of  Brachioradialis. 

Nerves. — The  Deltoideus  is  suppUed  by  the  fifth  and  sixth  cervical  through  the  axillary  nerve. 

Actions. — The  Deltoideus  raises  the  arm  from  the  side,  so  as  to  bring  it  at  right  angles  with 
the  trunk.  Its  anterior  fibers,  assisted  by  the  Pectoralis  major,  draw  the  arm  forward;  and  its 
posterior  fibers,  aided  by  the  Teres  major  and  Latissimus  dorsi,  draw  it  backward. 


RECORD muscle_pectoralis_major_clavicular
OCR lines 33505-33543
The  Pectoralis  major  (Fig.  410)  is  a  thick,  fan-shaped  muscle,  situated  at  the 
upper  and  forepart  of  the  chest.  It  arises  from  the  anterior  surface  of  the  sternal 
half  of  the  clavicle;  from  half  the  breadth  of  the  anterior  surface  of  the  sternum, 
as  low  down  as  the  attachment  of  the  cartilage  of  the  sixth  or  seventh  rib ;  from  the 


I 


MUSCLES  OF  THE  UPPER  EXTREMITY  437 

cartilages  of  all  the  true  ribs,  with  the  exception,  frequently,  of  the  jBrst  or  seventh, 
or  both,  and  from  the  aponeurosis  of  the  Obliquus  externus  abdominis.  From  this 
extensive  origin  the  fibers  converge  toward  their  insertion;  those  arising  from  the 
clavicle  pass  obliquely  downward  and  lateralward,  and  are  usually  separated  from 
the  rest  by  a  slight  interval;  those  from  the  lower  part  of  the  sternum,  and  the 
cartilages  of  the  lower  true  ribs,  run  upward  and  lateralward;  while  the  middle 
fibers  pass  horizontally.  They  all  end  in  a  flat  tendon,  about  5  cm.  broad,  w^hich 
is  inserted  into  the  crest  of  the  greater  tubercle  of  the  humerus.  This  tendon  con- 
l^psists  of  two  laminae,  placed  one  in  front  of  the  other,  and  usually  blended  together 
^^^below.  The  anterior  lamina,  the  thicker,  receives  the  clavicular  and  the  uppermost 
sternal  fibers;  they  are  inserted  in  the  same  order  as  that  in  which  they  arise: 
that  is  to  say,  the  most  lateral  of  the  clavicular  fibers  are  inserted  at  the  upper 
part  of  the  anterior  lamina;  the  uppermost  sternal  fibers  pass  down  to  the  lower 
part  of  the  lamina  which  extends  as  low  as  the  tendon  of  the  Deltoideus  and  joins 
with  it.  The  posterior  lamina  of  the  tendon  receives  the  attachment  of  the  greater 
part  of  the  sternal  portion  and  the  deep  fibers,  i.  e.,  those  from  the  costal  cartilages. 
These  deep  fibers,  and  particularly  those  from  the  lower  costal  cartilages,  ascend 

I^_  the  higher,  turning  backward  successively  behind  the  superficial  and  upper  ones, 
^Bso  that  the  tendon  appears  to  be  twisted.  The  posterior  lamina  reaches  higher 
on  the  humerus  than  the  anterior  one,  and  from  it  an  expansion  is  given  off  which 
covers  the  intertubercular  groove  and  blends  with  the  capsule  of  the  shoulder- 
joint.  From  the  deepest  fibers  of  this  lamina  at  its  insertion  an  expansion  is  given 
off  which  lines  the  intertubercular  groove,  while  from  the  lower  border  of  the  tendon 
a  third  expansion  passes  downward  to  the  fascia  of  the  arm. 

I^B     Variations. — The  more  frequent  variations  are  greater  or  less  extent  of  attachment  to  the  ribs 
I  ^m  and  sternum,  varying  size  of  the  abdominal  part  or  its  absence,  greater  or  less  extent  of  separation 
OCR lines 33661-33670
Actions. — If  the  arm  has  been  raised  by  the  Deltoideus,  the  Pectorahs  major  will,  conjointly 
with  the  Latissimus  dorsi  and  Teres  major,  depress  it  to  the  side  of  the  chest.  If  acting  alone, 
it  adducts  and  draws  forward  the  arm,  bringing  it  across  the  front  of  the  chest,  and  at  the  same 
time  rotates  it  inward.  The  Pectoralis  minor  depresses  the  point  of  the  shoulder,  drawing  the 
scapula  downward  and  medialward  toward  the  thorax,  and  throwing  the  inferior  angle  back- 
ward. The  Subclavius  depresses  the  shoulder,  carrying  it  downward  and  forward.  When  the 
arms  are  fixed,  all  three  of  these  muscles  act  upon  the  ribs;  drawing  them  upward  and  expand- 
ing the  chest,  and  thus  becoming  very  important  agents  in  forced  inspiration.  The  Serratus 
anterior,  as  a  whole,  carries  the  scapula  forward,  and  at  the  same  time  raises  the  vertebral  border 
of  the  bone.  It  is  therefore  concerned  in  the  action  of  pushing.  Its  lower  and  stronger  fibers 

RECORD muscle_pectoralis_major_sternocostal
OCR lines 33505-33551
The  Pectoralis  major  (Fig.  410)  is  a  thick,  fan-shaped  muscle,  situated  at  the 
upper  and  forepart  of  the  chest.  It  arises  from  the  anterior  surface  of  the  sternal 
half  of  the  clavicle;  from  half  the  breadth  of  the  anterior  surface  of  the  sternum, 
as  low  down  as  the  attachment  of  the  cartilage  of  the  sixth  or  seventh  rib ;  from  the 


I 


MUSCLES  OF  THE  UPPER  EXTREMITY  437 

cartilages  of  all  the  true  ribs,  with  the  exception,  frequently,  of  the  jBrst  or  seventh, 
or  both,  and  from  the  aponeurosis  of  the  Obliquus  externus  abdominis.  From  this 
extensive  origin  the  fibers  converge  toward  their  insertion;  those  arising  from  the 
clavicle  pass  obliquely  downward  and  lateralward,  and  are  usually  separated  from 
the  rest  by  a  slight  interval;  those  from  the  lower  part  of  the  sternum,  and  the 
cartilages  of  the  lower  true  ribs,  run  upward  and  lateralward;  while  the  middle 
fibers  pass  horizontally.  They  all  end  in  a  flat  tendon,  about  5  cm.  broad,  w^hich 
is  inserted  into  the  crest  of  the  greater  tubercle  of  the  humerus.  This  tendon  con- 
l^psists  of  two  laminae,  placed  one  in  front  of  the  other,  and  usually  blended  together 
^^^below.  The  anterior  lamina,  the  thicker,  receives  the  clavicular  and  the  uppermost 
sternal  fibers;  they  are  inserted  in  the  same  order  as  that  in  which  they  arise: 
that  is  to  say,  the  most  lateral  of  the  clavicular  fibers  are  inserted  at  the  upper 
part  of  the  anterior  lamina;  the  uppermost  sternal  fibers  pass  down  to  the  lower 
part  of  the  lamina  which  extends  as  low  as  the  tendon  of  the  Deltoideus  and  joins 
with  it.  The  posterior  lamina  of  the  tendon  receives  the  attachment  of  the  greater 
part  of  the  sternal  portion  and  the  deep  fibers,  i.  e.,  those  from  the  costal  cartilages. 
These  deep  fibers,  and  particularly  those  from  the  lower  costal  cartilages,  ascend 

I^_  the  higher,  turning  backward  successively  behind  the  superficial  and  upper  ones, 
^Bso  that  the  tendon  appears  to  be  twisted.  The  posterior  lamina  reaches  higher 
on  the  humerus  than  the  anterior  one,  and  from  it  an  expansion  is  given  off  which 
covers  the  intertubercular  groove  and  blends  with  the  capsule  of  the  shoulder- 
joint.  From  the  deepest  fibers  of  this  lamina  at  its  insertion  an  expansion  is  given 
off  which  lines  the  intertubercular  groove,  while  from  the  lower  border  of  the  tendon 
a  third  expansion  passes  downward  to  the  fascia  of  the  arm. 

I^B     Variations. — The  more  frequent  variations  are  greater  or  less  extent  of  attachment  to  the  ribs 
I  ^m  and  sternum,  varying  size  of  the  abdominal  part  or  its  absence,  greater  or  less  extent  of  separation 

of  sternocostal  and  clavicular  parts,  fusion  of  clavicular  part  with  deltoid,  decussation  in  front  of 

the  sternum.     Deficiency  or  absence  of  the  sternocostal  part  is  not  uncommon.     Absence  of  the 

clavicular  part  is  less  frequent.    Rarely  the  whole  muscle  is  wanting. 

Costocoracaideus  is  a  muscular  band  occasionally  found  arising  from  the  ribs  or  aponeurosis  of  the 
OCR lines 33661-33670
Actions. — If  the  arm  has  been  raised  by  the  Deltoideus,  the  Pectorahs  major  will,  conjointly 
with  the  Latissimus  dorsi  and  Teres  major,  depress  it  to  the  side  of  the  chest.  If  acting  alone, 
it  adducts  and  draws  forward  the  arm,  bringing  it  across  the  front  of  the  chest,  and  at  the  same 
time  rotates  it  inward.  The  Pectoralis  minor  depresses  the  point  of  the  shoulder,  drawing  the 
scapula  downward  and  medialward  toward  the  thorax,  and  throwing  the  inferior  angle  back- 
ward. The  Subclavius  depresses  the  shoulder,  carrying  it  downward  and  forward.  When  the 
arms  are  fixed,  all  three  of  these  muscles  act  upon  the  ribs;  drawing  them  upward  and  expand- 
ing the  chest,  and  thus  becoming  very  important  agents  in  forced  inspiration.  The  Serratus 
anterior,  as  a  whole,  carries  the  scapula  forward,  and  at  the  same  time  raises  the  vertebral  border 
of  the  bone.  It  is  therefore  concerned  in  the  action  of  pushing.  Its  lower  and  stronger  fibers 

RECORD muscle_erector_spinae_group
OCR lines 31197-31255
The  Sacrospinalis  (Erector  spines)  (Fig.  389),  and  its  prolongations  in  the 
thoracic  and  cervical  regions,  lie  in  the  groove  on  the  side  of  the  vertebral  column. 


398 


MYOLOGY 


They  are  covered  in  the  lumbar  and  thoracic  regions  by  the  lumbodorsal  fascia,| 
and  in  the  cervical  region  by  the  nuchal  fascia.    This  large  muscular  and  tendinous 

Occipital  bom 


Multibus 


First  thoracic  vertebra 


First  lumbar  vertebra 


First  sacral  vertebra 


Fig.  389. — Deep  musclea  of  tlie  back. 


THE  DEEP  MUSCLES  OF  THE  BACK  399 

mass  varies  in  size  and  structure  at  different  parts  of  the  vertebral  column.  In 
the  sacral  region  it  is  narrow  and  pointed,  and  at  its  origin  chiefly  tendinous  in 
structure.  In  the  lumbar  region  it  is  larger,  and  forms  a  thick  fleshy  mass  which, 
on  being  followed  upward,  is  subdivided  into  three  columns;  these  gradually 
diminish  in  size  as  they  ascend  to  be  inserted  into  the  vertebrae  and  ribs. 

The  Sacrospinalis  arises  from  the  anterior  surface  of  a  broad  and  thick  tendon, 
which  is  attached  to  the  medial  crest  of  the  sacrum,  to  the  spinous  processes  of 
the  lumbar  and  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  thoracic  vertebrae,  and  the  supraspinal 
ligament,  to  the  back  part  of  the  inner  lip  of  the  iliac  crests  and  to  the  lateral 
crests  of  the  sacrum,  where  it  blends  with  the  sacrotuberous  and  posterior  sacro- 
iliac ligaments.  Some  of  its  fibers  are  continuous  with  the  fibers  of  origin  of  the 
Glutseus  maximus.  The  muscular  fibers  form  a  large  fleshy  mass  which  splits, 
in  the  upper  lumbar  region  into  three  columns,  viz.,  a  lateral,  the  Iliocostalis,  an 
intermediate,  the  Longissimus,  and  a  medial,  the  Spinalis.  Each  of  these  consists 
from  below  upward,  of  three  parts,  as  follows: 

Lateral  Column.  Intermediate  Column.  Medial  Column. 
Iliocostalis.                          Longissimus.  Spinalis, 

(a)  I.  lumborum.  (a)  L.  dorsi.  (a)  S.  dorsi. 

(6)  I.  dorsi.  (6)  L.  cervicis.  (b)  S.  cervicis. 

(c)  I.  cervicis.  (c)  L.  capitis.  (c)  S.  capitis. 

OCR lines 31462-31476
Actions. — The  Sacrospinalis  and  its  upward  continuations  and  the  Spinales  serve  to  main- 
tain the  vertebral  column  in  the  erect  posture;  they  also  serve  to  bend  the  trunk  backward  when 
it  is  required  to  counterbalance  the  influence  of  any  weight  at  the  front  of  the  body — as,  for 
instance,  when  a  heavy  weight  is  suspended  from  the  neck,  or  when  there  is  any  great  abdominal 
distension,  as  in  pregnancy  or  dropsy;  the  peculiar  gait  under  such  circumstances  depends  upon 
the  vertebral  column  being  drawn  backward,  by  the  counterbalancing  action  of  the  Sacrospinales. 
The  muscles  which  form  the  continuation  of  the  Sacrospinales  on  to  the  head  and  neck  steady 
those  parts  and  fix  them  in  the  upright  position.  If  the  IHocostalis  lumborum  and  Longissimus 
dorsi  of  one  side  act,  they  serve  to  draw  down  the  chest  and  vertebral  column  to  the  correspond- 
ing side.  The  Iliocostales  cervicis,  taking  their  fixed  points  from  the  cervical  vertebriE,  elevate 
those  ribs  to  which  they  are  attached;  taking  their  fixed  points  from  the  ribs,  both  muscles  help 
to  extend  the  neck;  while  one  muscle  bends  the  neck  to  its  own  side.  When  both  Longissimi 
cervicis  act  from  below,  they  bend  the  neck  backward.  When  both  Longissimi  capitis  act  from 
below,  they  bend  the  head  backward;  while,  if  only  one  muscle  acts,  the  face  is  turned  to  the 
side  on  which  the  muscle  is  acting,  and  then  the  head  is  bent  to  the  shoulder.  The  two  Recti 

RECORD muscle_multifidus
OCR lines 31337-31354
The  Multiiidus  (Multifidvs  spince)  consists  of  a  number  of  fleshy  and  tendinous 
fasciculi,  which  fill  up  the  groove  on  either  side  of  the  spinous  processes  of  the  ver- 
tebrse, from  the  sacrum  to  the  axis.  In  the  sacral  region,  these  fasciculi  arise  from 
the  back  of  the  sacrum,  as  low  as  the  fourth  sacral  foramen,  from  the  aponeu- 
rosis of  origin  of  the  Sacrospinalis,  from  the  medial  surface  of  the  posterior  superior 
iliac  spine,  and  from  the  posterior  sacroiliac  ligaments;  in  the  lumbar  region, 
from  all  the  mamillary  processes;  in  the  thoracic  region,  from  all  the  transverse 
processes;  and  in  the  cervical  region,  from  the  articular  processes  of  the  lower 
four  vertebrse.  Each  fasciculus,  passing  obliquely  upward  and  medialward,  is 
inserted  into  the  whole  length  of  the  spinous  process  of  one  of  the  vertebrse  above. 
These  fasciculi  vary  in  length:  the  most  superficial,  the  longest,  pass  from  one 
vertebra  to  the  third  or  fourth  above;  those  next  in  order  run  from  one  vertebra 
to  the  second  or  third  above;  while  the  deepest  connect  two  contiguous  vertebrse. 

The  Rotatores  (Rotatores  spince)  lie  beneath  the  Multifidus  and  are  found  only 
in  the  thoracic  region;  they  are  eleven  in  number  on  either  side.  Each  muscle  is 
small  and  somewhat  quadrilateral  in  form;  it  arises  from  the  upper  and  back  part  of 
the  transverse  process,  and  is  inserted  into  the  lower  border  and  lateral  surface  of 
OCR lines 31479-31485
Multifidus  acts  successively  upon  the  different  parts  of  the  column;  thus,  the  sacrum  furnishes 
a  fixed  point  from  which  the  fasciculi  of  this  muscle  acts  upon  the  lumbar  region;  which  in  tui'n 
becomes  the  fixed  point  for  the  fascicuU  moving  the  thoracic  region,  and  so  on  throughout  the 
entire  length  of  the  column.  The  Multifidus  also  serves  to  rotate  the  column,  so  that  the  front 
of  the  trimk  is  turned  to  the  side  opposite  to  that  from  which  the  muscle  acts,  this  muscle  being 
assisted  in  its  action  by  the  Obliquus  extemus  abdominis.  The  Obliquus  capitis  superior  draws 
the  head  backward  and  to  its  own  side.  The  Obliquus  inferior  rotates  the  atlas,  and  with  it  the 

RECORD muscle_coracobrachialis
OCR lines 33893-33900
The  Coracobrachialis  (Fig.  411),  the  smallest  of  the  three  muscles  in  this  region, 
is  situated  at  the  upper  and  medial  part  of  the  arm.  It  arises  from  the  apex  of 
the  coracoid  process,  in  common  with  the  short  head  of  the  Biceps  brachii,  and  from 
the  intermuscular  septum  between  the  two  muscles ;  it  is  inserted  by  means  of  a  flat 
tendon  into  an  impression  at  the  middle  of  the  medial  surface  and  border  of  the 
body  of  the  humerus  between  the  origins  of  the  Triceps  brachii  and  Brachialis. 
lit  is  perforated  by  the  musculocutaneous  nerve. 

OCR lines 34013-34019
Actions. — The  CoracobrachiaUs  draws  the  humerus  forward  and  medialward,  and  at  the 
same  time  assists  in  retaining  the  head  of  the  bone  in  contact  with  the  glenoid  cavity.  The 
Biceps  brachii  is  a  flexor  of  the  elbow  and,  to  a  less  extent,  of  the  shoulder;  it  is  also  a  powerful 
supinator,  and  serves  to  render  tense  the  deep  fascia  of  the  forearm  by  means  of  the  lacertus 
fibrosus  given  off  from  its  tendon.  The  Brachialis  is  a  flexor  of  the  forearm,  and  forms  an  impor- 
tant defence  to  the  elbow-joint.  When  the  forearm  is  fixed,  the  Biceps  brachii  and  Brachialis 
flex  the  arm  upon  the  forearm,  as  in  efforts  of  climbing. 

RECORD muscle_brachioradialis
OCR lines 34551-34560
The  Brachioradialis  {Supinator  longus)  is  the  most  superficial  muscle  on  the 
radial  side  of  the  forearm.  It  arises  from  the  upper  two-thirds  of  the  lateral 
supracondylar  ridge  of  the  humerus,  and  from  the  lateral  intermuscular  septum, 
being  limited  above  by  the  groove  for  the  radial  nerve.  Interposed  between  it 
and  the  Brachialis  are  the  radial  nerve  and  the  anastomosis  between  the  anterior 
branch  of  the  profunda  artery  and  the  radial  recurrent.  The  fibers  end  above 
the  middle  of  the  forearm  in  a  flat  tendon,  which  is  inserted  into  the  lateral  side 
of  the  base  of  the  styloid  process  of  the  radius.  The  tendon  is  crossed  near  its 
insertion  by  the  tendons  of  the  Abductor  pollicis  longus  and  Extensor  pollicis 
brevis;  on  its  ulnar  side  is  the  radial  artery. 
OCR lines 34824-34831
Actions. — The  muscles  of  the  lateral  and  dorsal  aspects  of  the  forearm,  which  comprise  all 
the  Extensor  muscles  and  the  Supinator,  act  upon  the  forearm,  wrist,  and  hand;  they  are  the 
direct  antagonists  of  the  Pronator  and  Flexor  muscles.  The  Anconeus  assists  the  Triceps  in 
extending  the  forearm.  The  Brachioradialis  is  a  flexor  of  the  elbow-joint,  but  only  acts  as  such 
when  the  movement  of  flfexion  has  been  initiated  by  the  Biceps  brachii  and  Brachialis.  The 
action  of  the  Supinator  is 'suggested  by  its  name;  it  assists  the  Biceps  in  bringing  the  hand  into 
the  supine  position.  The  Extensor  carpi  radialis  longus  extends  the  wrist  and  abducts  the  hand. 
It  may  also  assist  in  bending  the  elbow-joint;  at  all  events  it  serves  to  fix  or  steady  this' articula- 

RECORD muscle_forearm_flexor_group
OCR lines 34423-34445
Actions. — These  muscles  act  upon  the  forearm,  the  wrist,  and  hand.  The  Pronator  teres 
rotates  the  radius  upon  the  ulna,  rendering  the  hand  prone;  when  the  radius  is  fixed,  it  assists 
in  flexing  the  forearm.  The  Flexor  carpi  radialis  is  a  flexor  and  abductor  of  the  wrist;  it  also 
assists  in  pronating  the  hand,  and  in  bending  the  elbow.  The  Flexor  carpi  ulnaris  is  a  flexor  and 
adductor  of  the  wrist;  it  also  assists  in  bending  the  elbow.  The  Palmaris  longus  is  a  flexor  of  the 
wrist-joint;  it  also  assists  in  flexing  the  elbow.  The  Flexor  digitorum  subMmis  flexes  first  the 
middle  and  then  the  proximal  phalanges;  it  also  assists  in  flexing  the  wrist  and  elbow.  The 
Flexor  digitorum  profundus  is  one  of  the  flexors  of  the  phalanges.  After  the  Flexor  sublimis 
has  bent  the  second  phalanx,  the  Flexor  profundus  flexes  the  terminal  one;  but  it  cannot  do  so 
until  after  the  contraction  of  the  superficial  muscle.     It  also  assists  in  flexing  the  wrist.    The 


THE  DORSAL  ANTIBRACHIAL  MUSCLES 


451 


Flexor  pollicis  longus  is  a  flexor  of  the  phalanges  of  the  thumb;  when  the  thumb  is  fixed,  it  assists 
in  flexing  the  wrist.  The  Pronator  quadratus  rotates  the  radius  upon  the  ulna,  rendering  the 
hand  prone. 



RECORD muscle_forearm_extensor_group
OCR lines 34824-34849
Actions. — The  muscles  of  the  lateral  and  dorsal  aspects  of  the  forearm,  which  comprise  all 
the  Extensor  muscles  and  the  Supinator,  act  upon  the  forearm,  wrist,  and  hand;  they  are  the 
direct  antagonists  of  the  Pronator  and  Flexor  muscles.  The  Anconeus  assists  the  Triceps  in 
extending  the  forearm.  The  Brachioradialis  is  a  flexor  of  the  elbow-joint,  but  only  acts  as  such 
when  the  movement  of  flfexion  has  been  initiated  by  the  Biceps  brachii  and  Brachialis.  The 
action  of  the  Supinator  is 'suggested  by  its  name;  it  assists  the  Biceps  in  bringing  the  hand  into 
the  supine  position.  The  Extensor  carpi  radialis  longus  extends  the  wrist  and  abducts  the  hand. 
It  may  also  assist  in  bending  the  elbow-joint;  at  all  events  it  serves  to  fix  or  steady  this' articula- 
tion. The  Extensor  carpi/radialis  brevis  extends  the  wrist,  and  may  also  act  slightly  as  an  abductor 
of  the  hand.  The  Extensor  carpi  ulnaris  extends  the  wrist,  but  when  acting  alone  inclines  the 
hand  toward  the  ulnar  side;  by  its  continued  action  it  extends  the  elbow-joint.  The  Extensor 
digitorum  communis  extends  the  phalanges,  then  the  wrist,  and  finally  the  elbow.  It  acts  prin- 
cipally on  the  proximal  phalanges,  the  middle  and  terminal  phalanges  being  extended  mainly 
by  the  Interossei  and  Lumbricales.  It  tends  to  separate  the  fingers  as  it  extends  them.  The 
Extensor  digiti  quinti  proprius  extends  the  little  finger,  and  by  its  continued  action  assists  in 
extending  the  wrist.  It  is  owing  to  this  muscle  that  the  little  finger  can  be  extended  or  pointed 
while  the  others  are  flexed.  The  chief  action  of  the  Abductor  pollicis  longus  is  to  carry  the  thumb 
laterally  from  the  palm  of  the  hand.  By  its  continued  action  it  helps  to  extend  and  abduct  the 
wrist.  The  Extensor  poUicis  brevis  extends  the  proximal  phalanx,  and  the  Extensor  pollicis 
longus  the  terminal  phalanx  of  the  thumb;  by  their  continued  action  they  help  to  extend  and 
abduct  the  wrist.  The  Extensor  indicis  proprius  extends  the  index  finger,  and  by  its  continued 
action  assists  in  extending  the  wrist. 

VI.     THE   MUSCLES    AND   FASCM)   OF   THE   HAND. 

The  muscles  of  the  hand  are  subdivided  into  three  groups:  (1)  those  of  the 

RECORD muscle_rectus_abdominis
OCR lines 32293-32311
The  Rectus  abdominis  (Fig.  397)  is  a  long  flat  muscle,  which  extends  along 
the  whole  length  of  the  front  of  the  abdomen,  and  is  separated  from  its  fellow 
of  the  opposite  side  by  the  linea  alba.  It  is  much  broader,  but  thinner,  above  than 
below,  and  arises  by  tw^o  tendons;  the  lateral  or  larger  is  attached  to  the  crest 
of  the  pubis,  the  medial  interlaces  with  its  fellow  of  the  opposite  side,  and  is  con- 
nected with  the  ligaments  covering  the  front  of  the  symphysis  pubis.  The  muscle 
is  inserted  by  three  portions  of  unequal  size  into  the  cartilages  of  the  fifth,  sixth, 
and  seventh  ribs.    The  upper  portion,  attached  principally  to  the  cartilage  of  the 


416 


MYOLOGY 


fifth  rib,  usually  has  some  fibers  of  insertion  into  the  anterior  extremity  of  the  rib 
itself.  Some  fibers  are  occasionally  connected  with  the  costoxiphoid  ligaments, 
and  the  side  of  the  xiphoid  process.  ^_l 
OCR lines 32427-32446
Actions. — When  the  pelvis  and  thorax  are  fixed,  the  abdominal  muscles  compress  the  abdominal 
viscera  by  constricting  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen,  in  which  action  they  are  materially  assisted 
by  the  descent  of  the  diaphragm.  By  these  means  assistance  is  given  in  expelling  the  feces 
from  the  rectmn,  the  urine  from  the  bladder,  the  fetus  from  the  uterus,  and  the  contents  of  the 
stomach  in  vomiting. 

If  the  pelvis  and  vertebral  column  be  fixed,  these  muscles  compress  the  lower  part  of  the  thorax, 
materially  assisting  expiration.    If  the  pelvis  alone  be  fixed,  the  thorax  is  bent  directly  forward, 
when  the  muscles  of  both  sides  act;  when  the  muscles  of  only  one  side  contract,  the  trunk  is  bent 
toward  that  side  and  rotated  toward  the  opposite  side. 
27 


418  MYOLOGY 

If  the  thorax  be  fixed,  the  muscles,  acting  together,  draw  the  pelvis  upward,  as  in  climbing; 
or,  acting  singly,  they  draw  the  pelvis  upward,  and  bend  the  vertebral  column  to  one  side  or  the 
other.  The  Recti,  acting  from  below,  depress  the  thorax,  and  consequently  flex  the  vertebral 
column ;  when  acting  from  above,  they  flex  the  pelvis  upon  the  vertebral  column.  The  Pyramidales 
are  tensors  of  the  linea  alba. 

RECORD muscle_external_oblique
OCR lines 31999-32023
MYOLOGY 

ones  being  attached  close  to  the  cartilages  of  the  corresponding  ribs,  the  lowest 
to  the  apex  of  the  cartilage  of  the  last  rib,  the  intermediate  ones  to  the  ribs  at 
some  distance  from  their  cartilages.  The  five  superior  serrations  increase  in  size 
from  above  downward,  and  are  received  between  corresponding  processes  of  the 
Serratus  anterior;  the  three  lower  ones  diminish  in  size  from  above  downward 
and  receive  between  them  corresponding  processes  from  the  Latissimus  dorsi. 
From  these  attachments  the  fleshy  fibers  proceed  in  various  directions.  Those 
from  the  lowest  ribs  pass  nearly^  vertically  downward,  and  are  inserted  into  the 
anterior  half  of  the  outer  lip  of  the  iliac  crest;  the  middle  and  upper  fibers,  directed 
downward  and  forward,  end  in  an  aponeurosis,  opposite  a  line  drawn  from  the 
prominence  of  the  ninth  costal  cartilage  to  the  anterior  superior  iliac  spine. 

The  aponeurosis  of  the  Obliquus  extemus  abdominis  is  a  thin  but  strong  mem- 
branous structure,  the  fibers  of  which  are  directed  downward  and  medialward. 
It  is  joined  with  that  of  the  opposite  muscle  along  the  middle  line,  and  covers 
the  whole  of  the  front  of  the  abdomen;  above,  it  is  covered  by  and  gives  origin 
to  the  lower  fibers  of  the  Pectoralis  major;  belotv,  its  fibers  are  closely  aggregated 
together,  and  extend  obliquely  across  from  the  anterior  superior  iliac  spine  to 
the  pubic  tubercle  and  the  pectineal  line.  In  the  middle  line,  it  interlaces  with 
the  aponeurosis  of  the  opposite  muscle,  forming  the  linea  alba,  which  extends  from 
the  xiphoid  process  to  the  symphysis  pubis. 

That  portion  of  the  aponeurosis  which  extends  between  the  anterior  superior 
OCR lines 32165-32177
The  Obliquus  intemus  abdominis  {Internal  or  ascending  oblique  muscle)  (Fig. 
395),  thinner  and  smaller  than  the  Obliquus  externus,  beneath  which  it  lies,  is  of 


THE  ANTERO-LATERAL  MUSCLES  OF  THE  ABDOMEN 


413 


an  irregularly  quadrilateral  form,  and  situated  at  the  lateral  and  anterior  parts 
of  the  abdomen.  It  arises,  by  fleshy  fibers,  from  the  lateral  half  of  the  grooved 
upper  surface  of  the  inguinal  ligament,  from  the  anterior  two-thirds  of  the  middle 
OCR lines 32427-32438
Actions. — When  the  pelvis  and  thorax  are  fixed,  the  abdominal  muscles  compress  the  abdominal 
viscera  by  constricting  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen,  in  which  action  they  are  materially  assisted 
by  the  descent  of  the  diaphragm.  By  these  means  assistance  is  given  in  expelling  the  feces 
from  the  rectmn,  the  urine  from  the  bladder,  the  fetus  from  the  uterus,  and  the  contents  of  the 
stomach  in  vomiting. 

If  the  pelvis  and  vertebral  column  be  fixed,  these  muscles  compress  the  lower  part  of  the  thorax, 
materially  assisting  expiration.    If  the  pelvis  alone  be  fixed,  the  thorax  is  bent  directly  forward, 
when  the  muscles  of  both  sides  act;  when  the  muscles  of  only  one  side  contract,  the  trunk  is  bent 
toward  that  side  and  rotated  toward  the  opposite  side. 
27 


RECORD muscle_internal_oblique
OCR lines 32165-32209
The  Obliquus  intemus  abdominis  {Internal  or  ascending  oblique  muscle)  (Fig. 
395),  thinner  and  smaller  than  the  Obliquus  externus,  beneath  which  it  lies,  is  of 


THE  ANTERO-LATERAL  MUSCLES  OF  THE  ABDOMEN 


413 


an  irregularly  quadrilateral  form,  and  situated  at  the  lateral  and  anterior  parts 
of  the  abdomen.  It  arises,  by  fleshy  fibers,  from  the  lateral  half  of  the  grooved 
upper  surface  of  the  inguinal  ligament,  from  the  anterior  two-thirds  of  the  middle 
lip  of  the  iliac  crest,  and  from  the  posterior  lamella  of  the  lumbodorsal  fascia. 
From  this  origin  the  fibers  diverge;  those  from  the  inguinal  ligament,  few  in  number 
and  paler  in  color  than  the  rest,  arch  downward  and  medialward  across  the  sper- 
matic cord  in  the  male  and  the  round  ligament  of  the  uterus  in  the  female,  and, 
becoming  tendinous,  are  inserted,  conjointly  with  those  of  the  Transversus,  into 
the  crest  of  the  pubis  and  medial  part  of  the  pectineal  line  behind  the  lacunar 
ligament,  forming  what  is  known  as  the  inguinal  aponeurotic  falx.    Those  from  the 


Inguinal  apo- 
neurotic falz 

Cremaster 


Fia.  395. — The  Obliquua  internua  abdominis. 


[anterior  third  of  the  iliac  origin  are  horizontal  in  their  direction,  and,  becoming 
tendinous  along  the  lower  fourth  of  the  linea  semilunaris,  pass  in  front  of  the  Rectus 
abdominis  to  be  inserted  into  the  linea  alba.  Those  arising  from  the  middle  third 
of  the  iliac  origin  run  obliquely  upward  and  medialward,  and  end  in  an  aponeurosis; 
this  divides  at  the  lateral  border  of  the  Rectus  into  two  lamellse,  which  are  con- 
tinued forward,  one  in  front  of  and  the  other  behind  this  muscle,  to  the  linea  alba: 
the  posterior  lamella  has  an  attachment  to  the  cartilages  of  the  seventh,  eighth, 
and  ninth  ribs.  The  most  posterior  fibers  pass  almost  vertically  upward,  to  be 
inserted  into  the  inferior  borders  of  the  cartilages  of  the  three  lower  ribs,  being 
continuous  with  the  Intercostales  interni. 


414 

OCR lines 32427-32438
Actions. — When  the  pelvis  and  thorax  are  fixed,  the  abdominal  muscles  compress  the  abdominal 
viscera  by  constricting  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen,  in  which  action  they  are  materially  assisted 
by  the  descent  of  the  diaphragm.  By  these  means  assistance  is  given  in  expelling  the  feces 
from  the  rectmn,  the  urine  from  the  bladder,  the  fetus  from  the  uterus,  and  the  contents  of  the 
stomach  in  vomiting. 

If  the  pelvis  and  vertebral  column  be  fixed,  these  muscles  compress  the  lower  part  of  the  thorax, 
materially  assisting  expiration.    If  the  pelvis  alone  be  fixed,  the  thorax  is  bent  directly  forward, 
when  the  muscles  of  both  sides  act;  when  the  muscles  of  only  one  side  contract,  the  trunk  is  bent 
toward  that  side  and  rotated  toward  the  opposite  side. 
27 


RECORD muscle_transversus_abdominis
OCR lines 32245-32260
The  Transversus  abdominis  (Trans- 
versalis  vmscle)  (Fig.  397),  so  called 
from  the  direction  of  its  fibers,  is  the 
most  internal  of  the  flat  muscles  of 
the  abdomen,  being  placed  imme- 
diately beneath  the  Obliquus  internus.  It  arises,  by  fleshy  fibers,  from  the 
lateral  third  of  the  inguinal  ligament,  from  the  anterior  three-fourths  of  the,  inner 
lip  of  the  iliac  crest,  from  the  inner  surfaces  of  the  cartilages  of  the  lower  six 
ribs,  interdigitating  with  the  diaphragm,  and  from  the  lumbodorsal  fascia. 
The  muscle  ends  in  front  in  a  broad  aponeurosis,  the  lower  fibers  of  w^hich 
curve  downward  and  medial  ward,  and  are  inserted,  together  with  those  of  the 
Obliquus  internus,  into  the  crest  of  the  pubis  and  pectineal  line,  forming  the  ingui- 
nal aponeurotic  falx.  Throughout  the  rest  of  its  extent  the  aponeurosis  passes 
horizontally  to  the  middle  line,  and  is  inserted  into  the  linea  alba;  its  upper 
three-fourths  lie  behind  the  Rectus  and  blend  with  the  posterior  lamella  of  the 
aponeurosis  of  the  Obliquus  internus;  its  lower  fourth  is  in  front  of  the  Rectus. 
OCR lines 32427-32438
Actions. — When  the  pelvis  and  thorax  are  fixed,  the  abdominal  muscles  compress  the  abdominal 
viscera  by  constricting  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen,  in  which  action  they  are  materially  assisted 
by  the  descent  of  the  diaphragm.  By  these  means  assistance  is  given  in  expelling  the  feces 
from  the  rectmn,  the  urine  from  the  bladder,  the  fetus  from  the  uterus,  and  the  contents  of  the 
stomach  in  vomiting. 

If  the  pelvis  and  vertebral  column  be  fixed,  these  muscles  compress  the  lower  part  of  the  thorax, 
materially  assisting  expiration.    If  the  pelvis  alone  be  fixed,  the  thorax  is  bent  directly  forward, 
when  the  muscles  of  both  sides  act;  when  the  muscles  of  only  one  side  contract,  the  trunk  is  bent 
toward  that  side  and  rotated  toward  the  opposite  side. 
27 


RECORD muscle_quadratus_lumborum
OCR lines 32572-32595
The  Quadratus  lumborum  (Fig.  389,  page  398)  is  irregularly  quadrilateral  in 
shape,  and  broader  below  than  above.  It  arises  by  aponeurotic  fibers  from  the 
iliolumbar  ligament  and  the  adjacent  portion  of  the  iliac  crest  for  about  5  cm., 
and  is  inserted  into  the  lower  border  of  the  last  rib  for  about  half  its  length,  and 
by  four  small  tendons  into  the  apices  of  the  transverse  processes  of  the  upper  four 
lumbar  vertebrae.  Occasionally  a  second  portion  of  this  muscle  is  found  in  front 
of  the  preceding.  It  arises  from  the  upper  borders  of  the  transverse  processes  of 
the  lower  three  or  four  lumbar  vertebrae,  and  is  inserted  into  the  lower  margin  of 
the  last  rib.  In  front  of  the  Quadratus  lumborum  are  the  colon,  the  kidney,  the 
Psoas  major  and  minor,  and  the  diaphragm;  between  the  fascia  and  the  muscle 
are  the  twelfth  thoracic,  ilioinguinal,  and  iliohypogastric  nerves. 

Variations. — The  number  of  attachments  to  the  vertebrae  and  the  extent  of  its  attachment  to 
the  last  rib  vary. 

Nerve  Supply. — The  twelfth  thoracic  and  first  and  second  lumbar  nerves  supply  this  muscle. 

Actions. — The  Quadratus  lumborvun  draws  down  the  last  rib,  and  acts  as  a  muscle  of  inspira- 
tion by  helping  to  fix  the  origin  of  the  diaphragm.  If  the  thorax  and  vertebral  column  are 
fixed,  it  may  act  upon  the  pelvis,  raising  it  toward  its  own  side  when  only  one  muscle  is  put  in 
action;  and  when  both  muscles  act  together,  either  from  below  or  above,  they  flex  the  trunk. 


V.     THE  MUSCLES  AND  FASCIA  OF  THE  PELVIS. 

RECORD muscle_diaphragm
OCR lines 31772-31836
The  Diaphragm  (Fig.  391)  is  a  dome-shaped  musculofibrous  septum  which 
separates  the  thoracic  from  the  abdominal  cavity,  its  convex  upper  surface  forming 
the  floor  of  the  former,  and  its  concave  under  surface  the  roof  of  the  latter.  Its 
peripheral  part  consists  of  muscular  fibers  which  take  origin  from  the  circumference 
of  the  thoracic  outlet  and  converge  to  be  inserted  into  a  central  tendon. 

The  muscular  fibers  may  be  grouped  according  to  their  origins  into  three  parts 
— sternal,  costal,  and  lumbar.  The  sternal  part  arises  by  two  fleshy  slips  from 
the  back  of  the  xiphoid  process ;  the  costal  part  from  the  inner  surfaces  of  the  car- 
tilages and  adjacent  portions  of  the  lower  six  ribs  on  either  side,  interdigitating 
with  the  Transversus  abdominis;  and  the  lumbar  part  from  aponeurotic  arches, 
named  the  lumbocostal  arches,  and  from  the  lumbar  vertebrae  by  two  pillars  or 
crura.    There  are  two  lumbocostal  arches,  a  medial  and  a  lateral,  on  either  side. 

The  Medial  Lumbocostal  Arch  (arcus  lumbocostalis  medialis  [Halleri];  internal 
arcuate  ligament)  is  a  tendinous  arch  in  the  fascia  covering  the  upper  part  of  the 
Psoas  major;  medially,  it  is  continuous  with  the  lateral  tendinous  margin  of  the 
corresponding  crus,  and  is  attached  to  the  side  of  the  body  of  the  first  or  second 


THE  MUSCLES  OF  THE  THORAX 


405 


lumbar  vertebra;  laterally,  it  is  fixed  to  the  front  of  the  transverse  process  of  the 
first  and,  sometimes  also,  to  that  of  the  second  lumbar  vertebra. 

The  Lateral  Lumbocostal  Arch  (arcus  lumbocostalis  lateralis  [Halleri];  external 
arcuate  ligament)  arches  across  the  upper  part  of  the  Quadratus  lumborum,  and 
is  attached,  medially,  to  the  front  of  the  transverse  process  of  the  first  lumbar 
vertebra,  and,  laterally,  to  the  tip  and  lower  margin  of  the  twelfth  rib. 

The  Crura. — At  their  origins  the  crura  are  tendinous  in  structure,  and  blend 
with  the  anterior  longitudinal  ligament  of  the  vertebral  column.  The  right  cms, 
larger  and  longer  than  the  left,  arises  from  the  anterior  surfaces  of  the  bodies  and 
intervertebral  fibrocartilages  of  the  upper  three  lumbar  vertebrae,  while  the  left 
cms  arises  from  the  corresponding  parts  of  the  upper  two  only.  The  medial  ten- 
dinous margins  of  the  crura  pass  forward  and  medialward,  and  meet  in  the  middle 
line  to  form  an  arch  across  the  front  of  the  aorta;  this  arch  is  often  poorly  defined. 


Xiphoid  process 


Opening  for  Lesser  Splanchnic  Nerve 


FiQ.  391. — The  diaphragm.     Under  surface. 


From  this  series  of  origins  the  fibers  of  the  diaphragm  converge  to  be  inserted 
into  the  central  tendon.  The  fibers  arising  from  the  xiphoid  process  are  very  short, 
and  occasionally  aponeurotic;  those  from  the  medial  and  lateral  lumbocostal 
arches,  and  more  especially  those  from  the  ribs  and  their  cartilages,  are  longer, 
and  describe  marked  curves  as  they  ascend  and  converge  to  their  insertion.  The 
fibers  of  the  crura  diverge  as  they  ascend,  the  most  lateral  being  directed  upward 
and  lateralward  to  the  central  tendon.  The  medial  fibers  of  the  right  crus  ascend 
on  the  left  side  of  the  esophageal  hiatus,  and  occasionally  a  fasciculus  of  the  left 
crus  crosses  the  aorta  and  runs  obliquely  through  the  fibers  of  the  right  crus  toward 
the  vena  caval  foramen  (Low^). 

'  Journal  of  Anatomy  and  Physiology,  vol.  xlii. 

OCR lines 31898-31913
Actions. — The  diaphragm  is  the  principal  muscle  of  inspiration,  and  presents  the  form  of 
a  dome  concave  toward  the  abdomen.  The  central  part  of  the  dome  is  tendinous,  and  the  peri- 
cardium is  attached  to  its  upper  surface;  the  circumference  is  muscular.  During  inspiration  the 
lowest  ribs  are  fixed,  and  from  these  and  the  crura  the  muscular  fibers  contract  and  draw  down- 
ward and  forward  the  central  tendon  with  the  attached  pericardium.  In  this  movement  the 
curvature  of  the  diaphragm  is  scarcely  altered,  the  dome  moving  downward  nearly  parallel 


THE  MUSCLES  OF  THE  THORAX  407 

to  its  original  position  and  pushing  before  it  the  abdominal  viscera.  The  descent  of  the  abdominal 
viscera  is  permitted  by  the  elasticity  of  the  abdominal  wall,  but  the  hmit  of  this  is  soon  reached. 
The  central  tendon  applied  to  the  abdominal  viscera  then  becomes  a  fixed  point  for  the  action 
of  the  diaphragm,  the  effect  of  which  is  to  elevate  the  lower  ribs  and  through  them  to  push 
forward  the  body  of  the  sternum  and  the  upper  ribs.  The  right  cupola  of  the  diaphragm, 
lying  on  the  liver,  has  a  greater  resistance  to  overcome  than  the  left,  which  lies  over  the  stomach, 

RECORD muscle_iliopsoas_group
OCR lines 35487-35534
The  Psoas  major  {Psoas  magnns)  (Fig.  430)  is  a  long  fusiform  muscle  placed  on 
the  side  of  the  lumbar  region  of  the  vertebral  column  and  brim  of  the  lesser  pelvis. 
It  arises  (1)  from  the  anterior  surfaces  of  the  bases  and  lower  borders  of  the  transverse 
processes  of  all  the  lumbar  vertebrae;  (2)  from  the  sides  of  the  bodies  and  the  corre- 
sponding intervertebral  fibrocartilages  of  the  last  thoracic  and  all  the  lumbar  verte- 
brae by  five  slips,  each  of  which  is  attached  to  the  adjacent  upper  and  lower  margins 
of  two  vertebrae,  and  to  the  intervertebral  fibrocartilage;  (3)  from  a  series  of 
tendinous  arches  which  extend  across  the  constricted  parts  of  the  bodies  of  the 
lumbar  vertebrae  between  the  previous  slips;  the  lumbar  arteries  and  veins,  and 
filaments  from  the  sympathetic  trunk  pass  beneath  these  tendinous  arches.  The 
muscle  proceeds  downward  across  the  brim  of  the  lesser  pelvis,  and  diminishing 
gradually  in  size,  passes  beneath  the  inguinal  ligament  and  in  front  of  the  capsule 
of  the  hip-joint  and  ends  in  a  tendon;  the  tendon  receives  nearly  the  whole  of 
the  fibers  of  the  Iliacus  and  is  inserted  into  the  lesser  trochanter  of  the  femur. 
A  large  bursa  w^hich  may  communicate  with  the  cavity  of  the  hip-joint,  separates 
the  tendon  from  the  pubis  and  the  capsule  of  the  joint. 

The  Psoas  minor  (Psoas  parvus)  is  a  long  slender  muscle,  placed  in  front  of  the 
Psoas  major.  It  arises  from  the  sides  of  the  bodies  of  the  twelfth  thoracic  and  first 
lumbar  vertebrae  and  from  the  fibrocartilage  between  them.  It  ends  in  a  long 
flat  tendon  which  is  inserted  into  the  pectineal  line  and  iliopectineal  eminence, 
and,  by  its  lateral  border,  into  the  iliac  fascia.    This  muscle  is  often  absent. 

The  Iliacus  is  a  flat,  triangular  muscle,  which  fills  the  iliac  fossa.  It  arises  from 
the  upper  two-thirds  of  this  fossa,  and  from  the  inner  lip  of  the  iliac  crest;  behind, 
from  the  anterior  sacroiliac  and  the  iliolumbar  ligaments,  and  base  of  the  sacrum; 
in  front,  it  reaches  as  far  as  the  anterior  superior  and  anterior  inferior  iliac  spines, 
and  the  notch  between  them.  The  fibers  converge  to  be  inserted  into  the  lateral 
side  of  the  tendon  of  the  Psoas  major,  some  of  them  being  prolonged  on  to  the  body 
of  the  femur  for  about  2.5  cm.  below  and  in  front  of  the  lesser  trochanter.^ 

Variations. — The  Iliacus  minor  or  Iliocapsidaris,  a  small  detached  part  of  the  Iliacus  is  frequently 
present.  It  arises  from  the  anterior  inferior  spine  of  the  ilium  and  is  inserted  into  the  lower  part 
of  the  intertrochanteric  line  of  the  femur  or  into  the  iliofemoral  ligament. 

Nerves. — The  Psoas  major  is  supphed  by  branches  of  the  second  and  third  lumbar  nerve; 
the  Psoas  minor  by  a  branch  of  the  first  lumbar  nerve;  and  the  lUacus  by  branches  of  the  second 
and  third  lumbar  nerves  through  the  femoral  nerve. 

Actions. — The  Psoas  major,  acting  from  above,  flexes  the  thigh  upon  the  pelvis,  being  assisted 
by  the  Iliacus;  acting  from  below,  with  the  femur  fixed,  it  bends  the  lumbar  portion  of  the  verte- 
bral column  forward  and  to  its  own  side,  and  then,  in  conjunction  with  the  Iliacus,  tilts  the  pelvis 
forward.  When  the  muscles  of  both  sides  are  acting  from  below,  they  serve  to  maintain  the 
erect  posture  by  supporting  the  vertebral  column  and  pelvis  upon  the  femora,  or  in  continued 
action  bend  the  trunk  and  pelvis  forward,  as  in  raising  the  trunk  from  the  recimibent  posture. 

The  Psoas  minor  is  a  tensor  of  the  ihac  fascia. 


RECORD muscle_sartorius
OCR lines 35665-35677
The  Sartorius,  the  longest  muscle  in  the  body,  is  narrow  and  ribbon-like;  it 
arises  by  tendinous  fibers  from  the  anterior  superior  iliac  spine  and  the  upper  half 
of  the  notch  below  it.  It  passes  obliquely  across  the  upper  and  anterior  part  of 
the  thigh,  from  the  lateral  to  the  medial  side  of  the  limb,  then  descends  vertically, 
as  far  as  the  medial  side  of  the  knee,  passing  behind  the  medial  condyle  of  the  femur 
to  end  in  a  tendon.  This  curves  obliquely  forward  and  expands  into  a  broad  apon- 
eurosis, which  is  inserted,  in  front  of  the  Gracilis  and  Semitendinous,  into  the  upper 
part  of  the  medial  surface  of  the  body  of  the  tibia,  nearly  as  far  forward  as  the 
anterior  crest.  The  upper  part  of  the  aponeurosis  is  curved  backward  over  the 
upper  edge  of  the  tendon  of  the  Gracilis  so  as  to  be  inserted  behind  it.  An  offset, 
from  its  upper  margin,  blends  with  the  capsule  of  the  knee-joint,  and  another 
from  its  lower  border,  with  the  fascia  on  the  medial  side  of  the  leg. 

OCR lines 35773-35779
Actions. — The  Sartoriua  flexes  the  leg  upon  the  thigh,  and,  continuing  to  act,  flexes  the  thigh 
upon  the  pelvis;  it  next  abducts  and  rotates  the  thigh  outward.  When  the  knee  is  bent,  the 
Sartorius  assists  the  Semitendinosus,  Semimembranosus,  and  Popliteus  in  rotating  the  tibia  inward. 
Taking  its  fixed  point  from  the  leg,  it  flexes  the  pelvis  upon  the  thigh,  and,  if  one  muscle  acts,  assists 
in  rotating  the  pelvis.  The  Quadriceps  femoris  extends  the  leg  upon  the  thigh.  The  Rectus 
femoris  assists  the  Psoas  major  and  Iliacus  in  supporting  the  pelvis  and  trunk  upon  the  femur. 
It  also  assists  in  flexing  the  thigh  on  the  pelvis,  or  if  the  thigh  be  fixed  it  will  flex  the  pelvis.  The 

RECORD muscle_tibialis_posterior
OCR lines 36783-36818
The  Tibialis  posterior  ( Tibialis  posticus)  lies  between  the  two  preceding  muscles, 
and  is  the  most  deeply  seated  of  the  muscles  on  the  back  of  the  leg.  It  begins 
above  by  two  pointed  processes,  separated  by  an  angular  interval  through  which 


» 


I- 


486  ^^       MYOLOGY 


I 


the  anterior  tibial  vessels  pass  forward  to  the  front  of  the  leg.  It  arises  from  the 
whole  of  the  posterior  surface  of  the  interosseous  membrane,  excepting  its  lowest 
part;  from  the  lateral  portion  of  the  posterior  surface  of  the  body  of  the  tibia, 
between  the  commencement  of  the  popliteal  line  above  and  the  junction  of  the 
middle  and  lower  thirds  of  the  body  below;  and  from  the  upper  two-thirds  of  the 
medial  surface  of  the  fibula ;  some  fibers  also  arise  from  the  deep  transverse  fascia, 
and  from  the  intermuscular  septa  separating  it  from  the  adjacent  muscles.  In 
the  lower  fourth  of  the  leg  its  tendon  passes  in  front  of  that  of  the  Flexor  digitorum 
longus  and  lies  with  it  in  a  groove  behind  the  medial  malleolus,  but  enclosed  in  a 
separate  sheath;  it  next  passes  under  the  laciniate  and  over  the  deltoid  ligament 
into  the  foot,  and  then  beneath  the  plantar  calcaneonavicular  ligament.  The 
tendon  contains  a  sesamoid  fibrocartilage,  as  it  runs  under  the  plantar  calcaneo- 
navicular ligament.  It  is  inserted  into  the  tuberosity  of  the  navicular  bone,  and 
gives  off  fibrous  expansions,  one  of  which  passes  backward  to  the  sustentaculum  tali 
of  the  calcaneus,  others  forward  and  lateralward  to  the  three  cuneiforms,  the 
cuboid,  and  the  bases  of  the  second,  third,  ^nd  fourth  metatarsal  bones. 

Nerves. — The  Popliteus  is  supplied  by  the  fourth  and  fifth  lumbar  and  first  sacral  nerves, 
the  Flexor  digitorum  longus  and  Tibiahs  posterior  by  the  fifth  lumbar  and  first  sacral,  and  the 
OCR lines 36822-36835
Actions. — The  PopHteus  assists  in  flexing  the  leg  upon  the  thigh;  when  the  leg  is  flexed,  it  will 
rotate  the  tibia  inward.  It  is  especially  called  into  action  at  the  beginning  of  the  act  of  bending 
the  knee,  inasmuch  as  it  produces  the  slight  inward  rotation  of  the  tibia  which  is  essential  in  the 
early  stage  of  this  movement.  The  Tibialis  posterior  is  a  direct  extensor  of  the  foot  at  the  ankle- 
joint;  acting  in  conjunction  with  the  Tibialis  anterior,  it  turns  the  sole  of  the  foot  upward  and 
medialward,  i.  e.,  inverts  the  foot,  antagonizing  the  Peronai,  which  turn  it  upward  and  lateral- 
ward  (evert  it).  In  the  sole  of  the  foot  the  tendon  of  the  TibiaUs  posterior  lies  directly  below  the 
plantar  calcaneonavicular  hgament,  and  is  therefore  an  important  factor  in  maintaining  the 
arch  of  the  foot.  The  Flexor  digitorum  longus  and  Flexor  hallucis  longus  are  the  direct  flexors  of 
the  phalanges,  and,  continuing  their  action,  extend  the  foot  upon  the  leg;  they  assist  the  Gastroc- 
nemius and  Soleus  in  extending  the  foot,  as  in  the  act  of  walking,  or  in  standing  on  tiptoe.  In 
consequence  of  the  oblique  direction  of  its  tendons  the  Flexor  digitorum  longus  would  draw  the 
toes  medialward,  were  it  not  for  the  Quadratus  plantae,  which  is  inserted  into  the  lateral  side 
of  the  tendon,  and  draws  it  to  the  middle  line  of  the  foot.  Taking  their  fixed  point  from  the 

RECORD muscle_fibularis_group
OCR lines 36568-36576
Actions. — The  Tibialis  anterior  and  Peronajus  tertius  are  the  direct  flexors  of  the  foot  at  the 
ankle-joint;  the  former  muscle,  when  acting  in  conjunction  with  the  Tibialis  posterior,  raises  the 
medial  border  of  the  foot,  i.  e.,  inverts  the  foot;  and  the  latter,  acting  with  the  Perona?i  brevis 
and  longus,  raises  the  lateral  border  of  the  foot,  i.  e.,  everts  the  foot.  The  Extensor  digitorum 
longus  and  Extensor  hallucis  longus  extend  the  phalanges  of  the  toes,  and,  continuing  their 
action,  flex  the  foot  upon  the  leg.  Taking  their  fixed  points  from  below,  in  the  erect  posture, 
all  these  muscles  serve  to  fix  the  bones  of  the  leg  in  the  perpendicular  position,  and  give  increased 
strength  to  the  ankle-joint. 

OCR lines 36948-36960
The  Peronaeus  brevis  lies  under  cover  of  the  Peronseus  longus,  and  is  a  shorter 
and  smaller  muscle.  It  arises  from  the  lower  two-thirds  of  the  lateral  surface  of 
the  body  of  the  fibula;  medial  to  the  Peronaeus  longus;  and  from  the  intermuscular 
septa  separating  it  from  the  adjacent  muscles  on  the  front  and  back  of  the  leg. 
The  fibers  pass  vertically  downward,  and  end  in  a  tendon  which  runs  behind  the 
lateral  malleolus  along  with  but  in  front  of  that  of  the  preceding  muscle,  the  two 
tendons  being  enclosed  in  the  same  compartment,  and  lubricated  by  a  common 
mucous  sheath.  It  then  runs  forward  on  the  lateral  side  of  the  calcaneus,  above 
the  trochlear  process  and  the  tendon  of  the  Peronaius  longus,  and  is  inserted  into 
the  tuberosity  at  the  base  of  the  fifth  metatarsal  bone,  on  its  lateral  side. 

On  the  lateral  surface  of  the  calcaneus  the  tendons  of  the  Peronsei  longus  and 
brevis  occupy  separate  osseoaponeurotic  canals  formed  by  the  calcaneus  and  the 
OCR lines 36988-36995
Actions. — The  Peronacf  longus  and  brevis  extend  the  foot  upon  fhe  leg,  in  conjuncfion  with 
the  Tibialis  posterior,  antagonizing  the  Tibiahs  anterior  and  Peronajus  tertius,  which  are  flexors 
of  the  foot.  The  Peronajus  longus  also  everts  the  sole  of  the  foot,  and  from  the  obhque  direction 
of  the  tendon  across  the  sole  of  the  foot  is  an  important  agent  in  the  maintenance  of  the  trans- 
verse arch.  Taking  their  fixed  points  below,  the  Perona^i  serve  to  steady  the  leg  upon  the  foot. 
This  is  especially  the  case  in  standing  upon  one  leg,  when  the  tendency  of  the  superincumbent 
weight  is  to  throw  the  leg  medialward ;  the  Peronajus  longus  overcomes  this  tendency  by  drawing 
on  the  lateral  side  of  the  leg. 

RECORD muscle_biceps_brachii_long_head
OCR lines 33955-33985
circumstance  it  has  received  its  name.  The  short  head  arises  by  a  thick  flattened 
tendon  from  the  apex  of  the  coracoid  process,  in  common  with  the  Coracobrachialis. 
The  long  head  arises  from  the  supraglenoid  tuberosity  at  the  upper  margin  of  the 
glenoid  cavity,  and  is  continuous  with  the  glenoidal  labrum.  This  tendon,  enclosed 
,in  a  special  sheath  of  the  synovial  membrane  of  the  shoulder-joint,  arches  over 
the  head  of  the  humerus;  it  emerges  from  the  capsule  through  an  opening  close 
to  the  humeral  attachment  of  the  ligament,  and  descends  in  the  intertubercular 
groove;  it  is  retained  in  the  groove  by  the  transverse  humeral  ligament  and  by  a 
fibrous  prolongation  from  the  tendon  of  the  Pectoralis  major.  Each  tendon  is 
succeeded  by  an  elongated  muscular  belly,  and  the  two  bellies,  although  closely 
applied  to  each  other,  can  readily  be  separated  until  within  about  7.5  cm.  of  the 
elbow-joint.  Here  they  end  in  a  flattened  tendon,  which  is  inserted  into  the  rough 
posterior  portion  of  the  tuberosity  of  the  radius,  a  bursa  being  interposed  between 
the  tendon  and  the  front  part  of  the  tuberosity.  As  the  tendon  of  the  muscle 
approaches  the  radius  it  is  twisted  upon  itself,  so  that  its  anterior  surface  becomes 


1  A  Cross-section  Anatomy,  New  York,   1911. 


444  ^^MAMJa^^       MYOLOGY 


lateral  and  is  applied  to  the  tuberosity  of  the  radius  at  its  insertion.    Opposrte 
the  bend  of  the  elbow  the  tendon  gives  off,  from  its  medial  side,  a  broad  aponeu- 
rosis, the  lacertus  fibrosus  (bicipital  fascia)  which  passes  obliquely  downward  and 
medial  ward  across  the  brachial  artery,  and  is  continuous  with  the  deep  fascia  j^ 
covering  the  origins  of  the  Flexor  muscles  of  the  forearm  (Fig.  410).  H 

Variations. — A  third  head  (10  per  cent.)  to  the  Biceps  brachii  is  occasionally  found,  arising  at 
the  upper  and  medial  part  of  the  Brachialis,  with  the  fibers  of  which  it  is  continuous,  and  inserted 
OCR lines 34013-34019
Actions. — The  CoracobrachiaUs  draws  the  humerus  forward  and  medialward,  and  at  the 
same  time  assists  in  retaining  the  head  of  the  bone  in  contact  with  the  glenoid  cavity.  The 
Biceps  brachii  is  a  flexor  of  the  elbow  and,  to  a  less  extent,  of  the  shoulder;  it  is  also  a  powerful 
supinator,  and  serves  to  render  tense  the  deep  fascia  of  the  forearm  by  means  of  the  lacertus 
fibrosus  given  off  from  its  tendon.  The  Brachialis  is  a  flexor  of  the  forearm,  and  forms  an  impor- 
tant defence  to  the  elbow-joint.  When  the  forearm  is  fixed,  the  Biceps  brachii  and  Brachialis 
flex  the  arm  upon  the  forearm,  as  in  efforts  of  climbing. 

RECORD muscle_biceps_brachii_short_head
OCR lines 33955-33985
circumstance  it  has  received  its  name.  The  short  head  arises  by  a  thick  flattened 
tendon  from  the  apex  of  the  coracoid  process,  in  common  with  the  Coracobrachialis. 
The  long  head  arises  from  the  supraglenoid  tuberosity  at  the  upper  margin  of  the 
glenoid  cavity,  and  is  continuous  with  the  glenoidal  labrum.  This  tendon,  enclosed 
,in  a  special  sheath  of  the  synovial  membrane  of  the  shoulder-joint,  arches  over 
the  head  of  the  humerus;  it  emerges  from  the  capsule  through  an  opening  close 
to  the  humeral  attachment  of  the  ligament,  and  descends  in  the  intertubercular 
groove;  it  is  retained  in  the  groove  by  the  transverse  humeral  ligament  and  by  a 
fibrous  prolongation  from  the  tendon  of  the  Pectoralis  major.  Each  tendon  is 
succeeded  by  an  elongated  muscular  belly,  and  the  two  bellies,  although  closely 
applied  to  each  other,  can  readily  be  separated  until  within  about  7.5  cm.  of  the 
elbow-joint.  Here  they  end  in  a  flattened  tendon,  which  is  inserted  into  the  rough 
posterior  portion  of  the  tuberosity  of  the  radius,  a  bursa  being  interposed  between 
the  tendon  and  the  front  part  of  the  tuberosity.  As  the  tendon  of  the  muscle 
approaches  the  radius  it  is  twisted  upon  itself,  so  that  its  anterior  surface  becomes 


1  A  Cross-section  Anatomy,  New  York,   1911. 


444  ^^MAMJa^^       MYOLOGY 


lateral  and  is  applied  to  the  tuberosity  of  the  radius  at  its  insertion.    Opposrte 
the  bend  of  the  elbow  the  tendon  gives  off,  from  its  medial  side,  a  broad  aponeu- 
rosis, the  lacertus  fibrosus  (bicipital  fascia)  which  passes  obliquely  downward  and 
medial  ward  across  the  brachial  artery,  and  is  continuous  with  the  deep  fascia  j^ 
covering  the  origins  of  the  Flexor  muscles  of  the  forearm  (Fig.  410).  H 

Variations. — A  third  head  (10  per  cent.)  to  the  Biceps  brachii  is  occasionally  found,  arising  at 
the  upper  and  medial  part  of  the  Brachialis,  with  the  fibers  of  which  it  is  continuous,  and  inserted 
OCR lines 34013-34019
Actions. — The  CoracobrachiaUs  draws  the  humerus  forward  and  medialward,  and  at  the 
same  time  assists  in  retaining  the  head  of  the  bone  in  contact  with  the  glenoid  cavity.  The 
Biceps  brachii  is  a  flexor  of  the  elbow  and,  to  a  less  extent,  of  the  shoulder;  it  is  also  a  powerful 
supinator,  and  serves  to  render  tense  the  deep  fascia  of  the  forearm  by  means  of  the  lacertus 
fibrosus  given  off  from  its  tendon.  The  Brachialis  is  a  flexor  of  the  forearm,  and  forms  an  impor- 
tant defence  to  the  elbow-joint.  When  the  forearm  is  fixed,  the  Biceps  brachii  and  Brachialis 
flex  the  arm  upon  the  forearm,  as  in  efforts  of  climbing. 

RECORD muscle_triceps_long_head
OCR lines 34021-34043
The  Triceps  brachii  {Triceps;  Triceps  extensor  cubiti)  (Fig.  412)  is  situated  on 
the  back  of  the  arm,  extending  the  entire  length  of  the  dorsal  surface  of  the  humerus. 
It  is  of  large  size,  and  arises  by  three  heads  (long,  lateral,  and  medial),  hence  its 
name. 

The  long  head  arises  by  a  flattened  tendon  from  the  infraglenoid  tuberosity 
of  the  scapula,  being  blended  at  its  upper  part  with  the  capsule  of  the  shoulder- 
joint;  the  muscular  fibers  pass  downward  between  the  two  other  heads  of  the 
muscle,  and  join  with  them  in  the  tendon  of  insertion. 

The  lateral  head  arises  from  the  posterior  surface  of  the  body  of  the  humerus, 
between  the  insertion  of  the  Teres  minor  and  the  upper  part  of  the  groove  for  the 
radial  nerve,  and  from  the  lateral  border  of  the  humerus  and  the  lateral  intermus- 
cular septum;  the  fibers  from  this  origin  converge  toward  the  tendon  of  insertion. 

The  medial  head  arises  from  the  posterior  surface  of  the  body  of  the  humerus, 
below  the  groove  for  the  radial  nerve;  it  is  narrow  and  pointed  above,  and  extends 
from  the  insertion  of  the  Teres  major  to  within  2.5  cm.  of  the  trochlea:  it  also 
arises  from  the  medial  border  of  the  humerus  and  from  the  back  of  the  whole 
length  of  the  medial  intermuscular  septum.  Some  of  the  fibers  are  directed 
downward  to  the  olecranon,  while  others  converge  to  the  tendon  of  insertion. 

The  tendon  of  the  Triceps  brachii  begins  about  the  middle  of  the  muscle:  it  con- 
OCR lines 34067-34094
however,  continued  downward,  on  the  lateral  side,  over  the  Anconseus,  to  blend 
with  the  deep  fascia  of  the  forearm. 

The  long  head  of  the  Triceps  brachii  descends  between  the  Teres  minor  and  Teres  major, 
dividing  the  triangular  space  between  these  two  muscles  and  the  humerus  into  two  smaller  spaces, 
one  triangular,  the  other  quadrangular  (Fig.  412).  The  triangular  space  contains  the  scapular 
circumflex  vessels;  it  is  bounded  by  the  Teres  minor  above,  the  Teres  major  below,  and  the 
scapular  head  of  the  Triceps  laterally.  The  quadrangular  space  transmits  the  posterior  humeral 
circumflex  vessels  and  the  axillary  nerve;  it  is  bounded  by  the  Teres  minor  and  capsule  of  the 
ehoulder-joint  above,  the  Teres  major  below,  the  long  head  of  the  Triceps  brachii  medially,  and 
the  humerus  laterally. 

Variations. — A  fourth  head  from  the  inner  part  of  the  humerus;  a  slip  between  Triceps  and 
Latissimus  dorsi  corresponding  to  the  Dorso-epitrochlearis. 

The  Subanconaeus  is  the  name  given  to  a  few  fibers  which  spring  from  the  deep  surface  of 
the  lower  part  of  the  Triceps  brachii,  and  are  inserted  into  the  posterior  Ugament  and  synovial 
membrane  of  the  elbow-joint. 

Nerves. — The  Triceps  brachii  is  supplied  by  the  seventh  and  eighth  cervical  nerves  through 
the  radial  nerve. 

Actions. — The  Triceps  brachii  is  the  great  extensor  muscle  of  the  forearm,  and  is  the  direct 
antagonist  of  the  Biceps  brachii  and  Brachialis.  When  the  arm  is  extended,  the  long  head  of 
the  muscle  may  assist  the  Teres  major  and  Latissimus  dorsi  in  drawing  the  humerus  backward 
and  in  adducting  it  to  the  thorax.  The  long  head  supports  the  under  part  of  the  shoulder-joint. 
The  Subanconseus  draws  up  the  synovial  membrane  of  the  elbow-joint  during  extension  of  the 
forearm. 

RECORD muscle_triceps_lateral_head
OCR lines 34021-34043
The  Triceps  brachii  {Triceps;  Triceps  extensor  cubiti)  (Fig.  412)  is  situated  on 
the  back  of  the  arm,  extending  the  entire  length  of  the  dorsal  surface  of  the  humerus. 
It  is  of  large  size,  and  arises  by  three  heads  (long,  lateral,  and  medial),  hence  its 
name. 

The  long  head  arises  by  a  flattened  tendon  from  the  infraglenoid  tuberosity 
of  the  scapula,  being  blended  at  its  upper  part  with  the  capsule  of  the  shoulder- 
joint;  the  muscular  fibers  pass  downward  between  the  two  other  heads  of  the 
muscle,  and  join  with  them  in  the  tendon  of  insertion. 

The  lateral  head  arises  from  the  posterior  surface  of  the  body  of  the  humerus, 
between  the  insertion  of  the  Teres  minor  and  the  upper  part  of  the  groove  for  the 
radial  nerve,  and  from  the  lateral  border  of  the  humerus  and  the  lateral  intermus- 
cular septum;  the  fibers  from  this  origin  converge  toward  the  tendon  of  insertion. 

The  medial  head  arises  from  the  posterior  surface  of  the  body  of  the  humerus, 
below  the  groove  for  the  radial  nerve;  it  is  narrow  and  pointed  above,  and  extends 
from  the  insertion  of  the  Teres  major  to  within  2.5  cm.  of  the  trochlea:  it  also 
arises  from  the  medial  border  of  the  humerus  and  from  the  back  of  the  whole 
length  of  the  medial  intermuscular  septum.  Some  of  the  fibers  are  directed 
downward  to  the  olecranon,  while  others  converge  to  the  tendon  of  insertion. 

The  tendon  of  the  Triceps  brachii  begins  about  the  middle  of  the  muscle:  it  con- 
OCR lines 34067-34094
however,  continued  downward,  on  the  lateral  side,  over  the  Anconseus,  to  blend 
with  the  deep  fascia  of  the  forearm. 

The  long  head  of  the  Triceps  brachii  descends  between  the  Teres  minor  and  Teres  major, 
dividing  the  triangular  space  between  these  two  muscles  and  the  humerus  into  two  smaller  spaces, 
one  triangular,  the  other  quadrangular  (Fig.  412).  The  triangular  space  contains  the  scapular 
circumflex  vessels;  it  is  bounded  by  the  Teres  minor  above,  the  Teres  major  below,  and  the 
scapular  head  of  the  Triceps  laterally.  The  quadrangular  space  transmits  the  posterior  humeral 
circumflex  vessels  and  the  axillary  nerve;  it  is  bounded  by  the  Teres  minor  and  capsule  of  the 
ehoulder-joint  above,  the  Teres  major  below,  the  long  head  of  the  Triceps  brachii  medially,  and 
the  humerus  laterally. 

Variations. — A  fourth  head  from  the  inner  part  of  the  humerus;  a  slip  between  Triceps  and 
Latissimus  dorsi  corresponding  to  the  Dorso-epitrochlearis. 

The  Subanconaeus  is  the  name  given  to  a  few  fibers  which  spring  from  the  deep  surface  of 
the  lower  part  of  the  Triceps  brachii,  and  are  inserted  into  the  posterior  Ugament  and  synovial 
membrane  of  the  elbow-joint. 

Nerves. — The  Triceps  brachii  is  supplied  by  the  seventh  and  eighth  cervical  nerves  through 
the  radial  nerve. 

Actions. — The  Triceps  brachii  is  the  great  extensor  muscle  of  the  forearm,  and  is  the  direct 
antagonist  of  the  Biceps  brachii  and  Brachialis.  When  the  arm  is  extended,  the  long  head  of 
the  muscle  may  assist  the  Teres  major  and  Latissimus  dorsi  in  drawing  the  humerus  backward 
and  in  adducting  it  to  the  thorax.  The  long  head  supports  the  under  part  of  the  shoulder-joint. 
The  Subanconseus  draws  up  the  synovial  membrane  of  the  elbow-joint  during  extension  of  the 
forearm. 

RECORD muscle_triceps_medial_head
OCR lines 34021-34043
The  Triceps  brachii  {Triceps;  Triceps  extensor  cubiti)  (Fig.  412)  is  situated  on 
the  back  of  the  arm,  extending  the  entire  length  of  the  dorsal  surface  of  the  humerus. 
It  is  of  large  size,  and  arises  by  three  heads  (long,  lateral,  and  medial),  hence  its 
name. 

The  long  head  arises  by  a  flattened  tendon  from  the  infraglenoid  tuberosity 
of  the  scapula,  being  blended  at  its  upper  part  with  the  capsule  of  the  shoulder- 
joint;  the  muscular  fibers  pass  downward  between  the  two  other  heads  of  the 
muscle,  and  join  with  them  in  the  tendon  of  insertion. 

The  lateral  head  arises  from  the  posterior  surface  of  the  body  of  the  humerus, 
between  the  insertion  of  the  Teres  minor  and  the  upper  part  of  the  groove  for  the 
radial  nerve,  and  from  the  lateral  border  of  the  humerus  and  the  lateral  intermus- 
cular septum;  the  fibers  from  this  origin  converge  toward  the  tendon  of  insertion. 

The  medial  head  arises  from  the  posterior  surface  of  the  body  of  the  humerus, 
below  the  groove  for  the  radial  nerve;  it  is  narrow  and  pointed  above,  and  extends 
from  the  insertion  of  the  Teres  major  to  within  2.5  cm.  of  the  trochlea:  it  also 
arises  from  the  medial  border  of  the  humerus  and  from  the  back  of  the  whole 
length  of  the  medial  intermuscular  septum.  Some  of  the  fibers  are  directed 
downward  to  the  olecranon,  while  others  converge  to  the  tendon  of  insertion. 

The  tendon  of  the  Triceps  brachii  begins  about  the  middle  of  the  muscle:  it  con- 
OCR lines 34067-34094
however,  continued  downward,  on  the  lateral  side,  over  the  Anconseus,  to  blend 
with  the  deep  fascia  of  the  forearm. 

The  long  head  of  the  Triceps  brachii  descends  between  the  Teres  minor  and  Teres  major, 
dividing  the  triangular  space  between  these  two  muscles  and  the  humerus  into  two  smaller  spaces, 
one  triangular,  the  other  quadrangular  (Fig.  412).  The  triangular  space  contains  the  scapular 
circumflex  vessels;  it  is  bounded  by  the  Teres  minor  above,  the  Teres  major  below,  and  the 
scapular  head  of  the  Triceps  laterally.  The  quadrangular  space  transmits  the  posterior  humeral 
circumflex  vessels  and  the  axillary  nerve;  it  is  bounded  by  the  Teres  minor  and  capsule  of  the 
ehoulder-joint  above,  the  Teres  major  below,  the  long  head  of  the  Triceps  brachii  medially,  and 
the  humerus  laterally. 

Variations. — A  fourth  head  from  the  inner  part  of  the  humerus;  a  slip  between  Triceps  and 
Latissimus  dorsi  corresponding  to  the  Dorso-epitrochlearis. 

The  Subanconaeus  is  the  name  given  to  a  few  fibers  which  spring  from  the  deep  surface  of 
the  lower  part  of  the  Triceps  brachii,  and  are  inserted  into  the  posterior  Ugament  and  synovial 
membrane  of  the  elbow-joint. 

Nerves. — The  Triceps  brachii  is  supplied  by  the  seventh  and  eighth  cervical  nerves  through 
the  radial  nerve. 

Actions. — The  Triceps  brachii  is  the  great  extensor  muscle  of  the  forearm,  and  is  the  direct 
antagonist  of  the  Biceps  brachii  and  Brachialis.  When  the  arm  is  extended,  the  long  head  of 
the  muscle  may  assist  the  Teres  major  and  Latissimus  dorsi  in  drawing  the  humerus  backward 
and  in  adducting  it  to  the  thorax.  The  long  head  supports  the  under  part  of  the  shoulder-joint. 
The  Subanconseus  draws  up  the  synovial  membrane  of  the  elbow-joint  during  extension  of  the 
forearm. 
