National Institute on Aging, Exercise & Physical Activity, March 2018.
US government text, public domain subject to source policy exclusions; no figures, photos or credited art retained.
Source: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/GOVPUB-HE20_3850-PURL-gpo124822/pdf/GOVPUB-HE20_3850-PURL-gpo124822.pdf
Extracted printed pages 70, 82 and 88; PDF text may contain OCR artifacts.

How to Improve Your Flexibility 70 
How Much, How Often 70 
Safety  70 
Progres
sing  70 
5 
how am I doing? 
Test Yourself  92 
Other Ways to Measure Progress  93 

PAGE 6
 
 
 
6 
healthy eating 
Tips for Healthy Eating  96 
Drinking Enough Fluids  97 
Eating Out  97 
7
keep going 
Activity Log  
Goal-Setting Worksheet 103 
Weekly Exercise and Ph
ysical Activity Plan  104 
Endurance Daily Record  105 
Strength Daily Record  106 
Flexibility Daily Record  107 
Monthly Progress Test  108 
20 Frequently Asked Questions  109 
Resources 1 1 6 
Acknowledgments 119 
102 


PAGE 7
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
introduction 
Welcome to Exercise & Physical Activity: Your Everyday Guide from the National
Ins
titute on Aging! The National Institute on Aging (NIA) is part of the National Institutes of 
Health, and the goal of our research is to improve the health and well-being of older adults. 
Like most people, you’ve probably heard that physical activity, including 
exercise, is good for you. If you’re already active, keep it up. It may even 
be time to push yourself a little harder, try a new activity, or find new ways 
to add exercise to your daily life. 
Don’t worry if you’ve never exercised, or if you stopped exercising for 
some reason. Let us help you get moving. By picking up this book and 
looking through it, you’ve taken an important first step toward good health. 
This guide is the centerpiece of Go4Life
®, NIA’s national campaign to help 
you fit exercise and physical activity into your daily life. To find out more 
about how Go4Life can help you be more active, visit our website at 
https:/ /go4life.nia.nih.gov. 
Go4Life is a registered trademark of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 

PAGE 8
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
6   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY 
Why Is Physical Activity   
Such a Big Deal? 
Regular exercise and physical activity 
are important to the physical and mental 
health of almost everyone, including older 
adults. Being physically active can help you 
continue to do the things you enjoy and stay 
independent as you age. Regular physical 
activity over long periods of time can produce 
long-term health benefts. That’s why health 
experts say that older adults should be active 
every day to maintain their health. 
In addition, regular exercise and physical 
activity can reduce the risk of developing 
some diseases and disabilities that develop 
as people grow older. In some cases, exercise 
is an efective treatment for many chronic 
conditions. For example, studies show 
that people with arthritis, heart disease, 
or diabetes beneft from regular exercise. 
Exercise also helps people with high blood 
pressure, balance problems, or difculty 
walking. 
One of the great things about physical activity 
is that there are so many ways to be active. 
For example, you can be active in short spurts 
throughout the day, or you can set aside 
specifc times of the day on specifc days of 
the week to exercise. Many physical activities 
— such as brisk walking, raking leaves, or 
taking the stairs whenever you can — are 
free or low cost and do not require special 
equipment. You could also check out an 
exercise video from the library or use the 
ftness center at a local senior center. 
This guide shows you many types of exercise 
and physical activity. It also has lots of tips 
to help you be active in ways that suit your 
lifestyle, interests, health, and budget, 
whether you’re just starting out, getting back 
to exercising after a break, or ft enough to 
run a 3-mile race. It’s for everyone — people 
who are healthy and those who live with an 
ongoing health problem or disability. 
GO HERE FOR MORE INFO 
For many people, “real life”— things like illness, 
traveling, or an unexpected event — can get in the 
way of being active. See page 28 for tips on how 
to deal with breaks in your physical activity routine. 

PAGE 9
   
 
 
 
 
 
 What’s the Difference Between
Physical Activity and Exercise? 
 
Both terms refer to the voluntary movements 
you do that burn calories. Physical activities 
are activities that get your body moving 
such as gardening, walking the dog, raking 
leaves, and taking the stairs instead of the 
elevator.  Exercise is a form of physical 
activity that is specifically planned, 
structured, and repetitive such as weight 
training, tai chi, or an aerobics class.  
Physical activity and exercise are both  
important and can help improve your 
ability to do the everyday activities you 
enjoy. (See Exercise and Everyday 
Activities Go Together on page 15.)
The bottom line? There are many ways to 
be active every day. Find something you 
enjoy doing, include it in your regular 
routine, and try to increase your level of 
activity over time.
INTRODUCTION 7 
make it a priority 
Being active and exercising regularly can change your life. 
See how Greta has benefited from regular exercise: 
“At age 67, I’m in the best physical condition of my life. Two 
years ago, I joined a low-impact aerobics class at a nearby 
senior center. The entire routine is done to music, planned 
and led by an instructor. My balance has improved greatly, 
and my osteoporosis has remained stable.” 

PAGE 10
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY 
Using This Book 
This guide can help you take charge of an important part of your health. You may want to read 
through the entire book frst to learn about the benefts of exercise and physical activity, and to 
fnd out how to get started, reduce your risks, and reward your progress. Then, keep it handy so 
you can refer to the sample exercises and use some of the charts at the back of the book to record 
your activities. From time to time, you may need to check the tips for getting back on track if 
there’s a break in your routine or the tips for healthy eating. Throughout the guide, you’ll fnd 
personal stories that we hope will inspire you to be more active every day. 
Chapter 1: Get Ready talks about the 
“why” of exercise and physical activity. It tells 
you the benefts of being active and describes 
the diferent types of exercise. 
Chapter 2: Get Set guides you on getting 
organized and reviewing your current activity 
levels, setting short- and long-term goals, and 
creating a realistic plan for becoming active 
over time. 
Chapter 3: Go! is all about the “how.” The 
guide ofers tips to help you get started. It 
also has ideas to help you stick with your 
decision to be active every day and to get you 
back on track if you have to stop exercising 
for some reason. 

PAGE 11
See pages 102-108 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4: Sample Exercises gives you some 
specifc activities and exercises, including exercises to 
increase your strength, improve balance, become more 
fexible, and increase endurance. All of the exercises 
have easy directions to help you do them safely. 
Chapter 5: How Am I Doing? ofers you some 
ways to test your progress and reward your success. 
Chapter 6: Healthy Eating briefy discusses 
another key to good health — nutritious eating habits. 
Chapter 7: Keep Going includes worksheets to 
keep track of your progress and answers to frequently 
asked questions about exercise and physical activity for 
older adults. You’ll also fnd a list of resources for more 
information. Some of the resources are especially for 
people with specifc health problems or disabilities who 
want to be active. 
GO HERE FOR MORE INFO 
Visit Go4Life, our online exercise and physical 
activity campaign, for exercises to try, workout 
videos, tracking tools, information about safety 
and motivation, and more. 
https://go4life.nia.nih.gov 
INTRODUCTION 9 
SAMPLE 
EXERCISES 
See pages 34-89 
KEEP GOING 
WORKSHEETS 

PAGE 12
1 
get ready 


PAGE 13
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1: GET READY   11 
Today, we know a lot more about older adults and their need to exercise. Regardless of their health and physical 
abilities, older adults can gain a lot by staying physically active. Even if you have difficulty standing or walking, 
you can still exercise and benefit from it. In fact, in most cases, you have more to lose by not doing anything. 
Exercise and physical activity beneft every 
area of your life. They can: 
• Help maintain and improve your physical
strength and ftness.
• Help improve your ability to do the things
you want to do.
• Help improve your balance.
• Help manage and prevent diseases like
diabetes, heart disease, breast and colon
cancer, and osteoporosis.
• Help reduce feelings of depression, may
improve mood and overall well-being, and
may improve or maintain some aspects of
cognitive function, such as your ability to
shift quickly between tasks, plan an
activity, and ignore irrelevant information.
As you’ve probably noticed, the key word is 
you. The benefts you gain from physical 
activity will depend on your starting point 
and how much efort you put into it. You’ll 
need to match your physical activity to your 
own needs and abilities. For example, some 
people can swim a mile without thinking 
twice about it. For others, a slow walk to the 
corner and back is a big achievement. Exercise 
and physical activity are good for just about 
everybody, and there are many activities to 
choose from. This guide has ideas to help you 
be active and have fun. 
GO HERE FOR MORE INFO 
See page 20 for more on talking with 
your doctor about physical activity. 


PAGE 14
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
12   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
make it fun 
Having fun and socializing are major reasons active people 
give when asked why they exercise. Ramesh can show you how: 
“I started playing tennis 38 years ago for pleasure. After moving 
south to get away from the cold and snow of the Midwest, I 
started playing year round. I play with friends every weekend, 
both singles and doubles. After tennis, we socialize over 
refreshments. That’s the best part of our get-together. At age 
65, I’m the oldest in the group; the youngest is 16. I love the 
game and hope to play forever.” 
What Kinds of Exercises and Physical 
Activities Improve Health and 
Physical Ability? 
Exercises generally fall into four main categories: 
endurance, strength, balance, and fexibility. 
Though we describe them separately, some 
activities ft into several categories. For 
example, many endurance activities also help 
build strength, and strength exercises can help 
improve balance. 

PAGE 15
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1: GET READY   13 
Endurance 
Endurance, or aerobic, activities increase your 
breathing and heart rate. These activities help 
keep you healthy, improve your ftness, and help 
you do the tasks you need to do every day. 
Endurance exercises improve the health of your 
heart, lungs, and circulatory system. They also 
delay or prevent many diseases that are common 
in older adults such as diabetes, colon and breast 
cancers, heart disease, and others. Physical 
activities that build endurance include: 
• Brisk walking
• Yard work (mowing, raking)
• Dancing
• Jogging
• Swimming
• Biking
• Climbing stairs or hills
• Playing tennis
• Playing basketball
GO HERE FOR MORE INFO 
Chapter 4, beginning on page 34, shows 
you how to do the exercises mentioned 
on this page and many others. 
Strength 
Even small increases in muscle strength can make a big diference 
in your ability to stay independent and carry out everyday activities 
such as climbing stairs and carrying groceries. Some people call 
using weight to improve your muscle strength “strength training” 
or “resistance training.” Strength exercises include: 
• Lifting weights (see page 41)
• Using a resistance band (see page 44)
Balance 
Balance exercises help prevent falls, a common problem in older 
adults. Many lower-body strength exercises also will improve your 
balance. Exercises to improve your balance include: 
• Standing on one foot (see page 65)
• Heel-to-toe walk (see page 66)
• Tai Chi
Flexibility 
Stretching can help your body stay fexible and limber, which 
gives you more freedom of movement for your regular physical 
activity as well as for your everyday activities. To increase your 
fexibility, try: 
• Shoulder and upper arm stretch (see page 73)
• Calf stretch (see page 88)
• Yoga

PAGE 16
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
14   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
QUICK TIP 
When working outdoors, be sure to use 
sunscreen. Also, wear sunglasses, protective 
clothing, and a hat with a wide brim. 
make it interesting 
There are many ways to be active. For Pat, age 56, gardening 
keeps her moving: 
“I know some people think gardening isn’t really exercise, but I’m 
here to say, ‘Are they kidding?’ Maybe I’m only exercising my 
imagination when I pore over plant catalogs to pick out seeds for 
the garden, but when spring comes, all that changes. Working in 
my garden means bending and lifting, moving and stretching, not 
to mention digging and hauling! Anyone who’s ever had a garden 
knows that shoveling compost, lifting 40-pound bags of mulch, 
transplanting seedlings, dividing plants, and pulling weeds are 
serious physical activities. For avid gardeners, there’s always 
something to do, from spring planting and weeding to fall raking 
and cleanup. It keeps a body moving!” 

PAGE 17
CHAPTER 1: GET READY 15 
 
 
Exercise and Everyday Activities Go Together  
Exercise and physical activity are good for your health. In addition, improving 
your endurance, strength, balance, and flexibility can help you do many of your 
everyday activities. For example:
Endurance  activities will make it  
easier for you to: 
•  Push your grandchildren  
on the swings 
•  Vacuum  
•  Rake leaves 
Flexibility, or stretching, exercises  
make it possible for you to: 
•  Look over your shoulder to see  
what’s behind you as you back  
the car out of the driveway  
•  Make the bed 
•  Bend over to tie your shoes 
Strength training can maintain  
your ability to: 
•  Carry a full laundry basket from  
the basement to the second foor 
•  Carry your smaller grandchildren  
•  Lift bags of mulch in the garden 
Balance  exercises can help you: 
•  Stand on tiptoe to reach  
something on the top shelf 
•  Walk up and down the stairs 
•  Walk on an uneven sidewalk  
without falling 
CHAPTER 1: GET READY 15 


PAGE 18
2 
get set 


PAGE 19
CHAPTER 2: GET SET 17 
We hope you agree that regular exercise and physical activity are important and that you’re ready to take  
action! This chapter is all about getting organized. It offers tips for setting short- and long-term goals,  
choosing activities and fitting them into your daily life, and managing some of the practical things, such as  
getting the right shoes or working with a personal trainer. 
This guide’s main goal is to help you become  
more active, get the most from your activities,  
and do them safely. The key is to know your  
starting point and build slowly from there.  
Knowing your starting point will help you  
pick activities that are comfortable and  
realistic for you. Starting out this way also  
will help you be successful.  
Identifying Your Starting Point 
Think about a typical weekday and weekend  
day. How much time do you spend sitting?  
How much time are you active? When you’re  
up and moving, what kinds of activities are  
you doing?  
To help you fgure out your activity level,  
try flling in an activity log. For a couple of  
weekdays and a weekend, keep track of how  
much time you exercise or are physically  
active. Write down how much time you  
spend doing each activity. The Activity Log  
on page 102 will get you started.  
You can use the last column of the Activity  
Log to write down some ways you think  
you can add activities to your daily routine.  
If you’re not active yet, aim for a modest  
beginning and build from there. If you are  
already pretty active, then you can be more  
ambitious about adding to your activities.  
GO HERE FOR MORE INFO  
If you need to jog your memory, go back to Chapter 1 and look at the examples of the four  
types of exercise. Also, review Exercise and Everyday Activities Go Together on page 15. 


PAGE 20
18   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
QUICK TIP 
There are many ways to fit 
exercise and physical activity 
into your regular routine: 
Try something new: If you 
babysit for your grandchildren, 
how about walking to the park 
instead of playing video games? 
Rethink your priorities: 
How impor
tant is an entire 
afternoon of TV? How about a 
walk after lunch instead? 
Work harder at the things you 
alre
ady do: Rake the leaves 
instead of using the leaf blower. 
Setting Your Goals 
Many people fnd that having a frm goal in 
mind motivates them to move ahead on a 
project. Goals are most useful when they are 
specifc, realistic, and important to you. 
Consider both short- and long-term goals. 
Your success depends on setting goals that 
really matter to you. Write down your goals, 
put them where you can see them, and review 
them regularly. 
In addition to seeing how physically active 
you are now, you can check how ft your body 
is. Several simple tests can help you see how 
ft you are right now (see page 92). The results 
can help you set realistic goals. They also will 
be useful later on to measure your progress. 
Short-term goals will help you make physical 
activity a regular part of your daily life. For 
these goals, think about the things you’ll need 
to get or do in order to be physically active. 
For example, you may need to buy walking 
shoes or fll out an Ac
tivity Log so you can 
fgure out how to ft physical activity into 
your busy day. Make sure your short-term 
goals will really help you be active. Here are 
a few examples of short-term goals: 
• Today, I will decide to be more active.
• Tomorrow, I will fnd out about exercise
classes in my area.
• By the end of this week , I will talk with my
friend about exercising with me a couple of
times a week.
• In the next 2 weeks, I will make sure I have
the shoes and comfortable clothes I need to
start walking.

PAGE 21
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 2: GET SET 19 
If you’re already active, think of short-term goals to 
increase your level of physical activity. For example, 
over the next week or two, you may want to move 
gradually from walking to jogging, increase the 
amount of weight you lift, or try a new kind of 
physical activity. No matter what your starting 
point, reaching your short-term goals will make 
you feel good and give you confdence to progress 
toward your long-term goals. Use the Goal-Setting 
Worksheet on page 103 to help you get started. 
After you write down your short-term goals, you 
can go on to identify your long-term goals. Focus 
on where you want to be in 6 months, a year, or 
2 years from now. Long-term goals also should be 
realistic, personal, and important to you. Here are 
a few examples: 
• By this time next year, I will swim a mile three
times a week.
• Next summer, I will be able to play ball with my
grandchildren.
• In 6 months, I will have my blood pressure under
control by increasing my physical activity and
following my doctor’s advice.
Add your own long-term goals to the Goal-Setting 
Worksheeton page 103. 
make it routine 
For Sam, “being able to do the things I enjoy doing” 
motivates him to exercise every day: 
“I started exercising regularly way back in 1960. A friend put 
me in touch with a personal trainer at a nearby gym, and he 
showed me how to lift weights. Today, at age 83, I’m still 
exercising to stay fit. I get up every day and exercise for 10 to 
15 minutes. I lift weights followed by stretching. In the evening, 
I do the same routine for about 15 minutes. I’m a drummer by 
profession, and I do about four gigs a month. Exercise keeps 
my muscles strong and lets me continue to do my drumming.” 

PAGE 22
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
20   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY 
QUICK TIP 
Don’t forget to build 
rewards into your plan. 
For each goal you reach, 
treat yourself to some-
thing special 
— a movie, 
a trip to a museum, a 
new CD, or a picnic in 
the park. 
Let us help you celebrate  
your pr
ogress! If you   
increase your physical  
activity for more than a  
month, call our Information  
Center at (800) 222-2225  
and we’ll send you a   
certificate  from the   
National Institute on   
Aging to recognize your  
commitment. 
Writing a Plan to Add Exercise 
and Physical Activity to Your Life 
Some people fnd that writing an exercise and 
physical activity plan helps them keep their 
promise to be active. See if this works for you. 
Be sure the plan is realistic for you to do, 
especially as you gain experience in how to 
be active. You might even make a contract 
with a friend or family member to carry out 
your plan. Involving another person can help 
you keep your commitment. 
Make your plan specifc and grounded in 
your goals. For each exercise or activity 
you choose, include: 
• What kind of activity you plan to do 
• Why you want to do it 
• When you will do it 
• Where you will do it 
Start out with realistic activities based 
on how physically active you are now. 
Don’t expect to go from couch potato to 
super athlete right away. Regularly review 
and update your plan and long-term goals 
so that you can build on your success. You 
can use the Weekly Exercise and Physical 
Activity Plan on page 104 to write down 
your activities. 
When it comes to motivation, the frst few 
months are crucial. If you can stick with 
physical activities you enjoy, it’s a good sign 
that you will be able to make exercise and 
physical activity a regular part of your 
everyday life. 
Talking With Your Doctor About 
Exercise and Physical Activity 
Most older people don’t have health problems 
that would prevent them from doing moderate 
activity or the types of exercises described in 
this guide. In fact, there’s a way for almost 
every older adult to exercise safely and get 
meaningful health benefts. 
You may want to talk with your doctor, 
however, if you aren’t used to energetic 
activity and you want to start a vigorous 
exercise program or signifcantly increase 
your physical activity. You also should talk 
with your doctor if you have any of the health 
problems mentioned on page 22. This does 
not mean that exercise is dangerous. Doctors 
rarely tell people not to exercise, but they 
may have certain safety tips for those who 
have recently had hip or back surgery, those 
with uncontrolled health problems, or those 
with chronic conditions such as diabetes, 
heart disease, or arthritis. 

PAGE 23
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
CHAPTER 2: GET SET 21 
Your activity level is an important topic 
to discuss with your doctor as part of your 
ongoing preventive health care. Talk about 
exercise at least once a year if your health is 
stable, and more often if your health is getting 
better or worse over time so that you can 
adjust your exercise program. Your doctor 
can help you choose activities that are best 
for you and reduce any risks. Here are a 
few things you may want to discuss: 
• Ask whether there are exercises or
activities you should avoid. An illness or
surgery may afect how you exercise. For
example, if you’ve had hip or back surgery,
you may need to modify or avoid some
exercises, or if you develop blood clots
in your legs, you will have to restrict your
activity for a time. Your doctor can tell
you how to increase your physical activity
gradually as you recover.
• Talk about any unexplained symptoms,
such as chest pain or pressure, pain
in your joints, dizziness, or shortness
of breath. Postpone exercise until the
problem is diagnosed and treated. (See
• Make sure your preventive care is up
to date. For example, women age 65
and older should have regular tests for
osteoporosis. Weight-bearing exercises
— such as walking and lifting weights —
are especially helpful for those with
osteoporosis.
• Understand how any ongoing health
conditions afect exercise and physical
activity. For example, people with
arthritis may need to avoid some types
of activity, especially when joints are
swollen or infamed. Those with diabetes
may need to adjust their daily schedule,
meal plan, or medications when
planning their activities.
• Talk to your doctor if you think you
might have an uncontrolled medical
condition that might afect the type
of exercise you should be doing. For
example, it is important to know how
to exercise safely if your blood pressure
or diabetes is not under control.
page 28 about getting back to regular
GO HERE FOR MORE INFOexercise after a break.)
Use the tracking tools at 
https://go4life.nia.nih.gov to set your 
exercise and physical activity goals and 
keep track of your progress. 


PAGE 24
22   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
QUICK TIP 
Some people with 
diabetes may need 
special shoes or 
shoe inserts to 
prevent serious foot 
problems. Medicare 
may pay some of the 
costs. Your doctor 
or podiatrist can tell 
you how to get these 
special shoes. 
Safety First: When to Check 
with Your Doctor 
Almost anyone, at any age, can do some type of 
exercise and physical activity. You can still be 
active even if you have a long-term condition 
like heart disease or diabetes. In fact, exercise 
and physical activity may help. But, talk with 
your doctor if you aren’t used to energetic 
activity. Other reasons to check with your 
doctor before you exercise include: 
• Any new symptom you haven’t
yet discussed
• Dizziness or shortness of breath
• Chest pain or pressure
• The feeling that your heart is skipping,
racing, or futtering
• Blood clots
• An infection or fever with muscle aches
• Unplanned weight loss
• Foot or ankle sores that won’t heal
• Joint swelling
• A bleeding or detached retina, eye surgery,
or laser treatment
• A hernia
• Recent hip or back surgery
Getting the Right Shoes 
Your shoes are an important part of your 
physical activity routine. Remember, you’re 
going to be wearing them a lot. Here are a 
few pointers to keep in mind: 
• Choose shoes that are made for the type
of physical activity you want to do (walking, 
running, dancing, bowling, tennis).
• Look for shoes with fat, non-skid soles;
good heel support; enough room for your
toes; and a cushioned arch that’s not too
high or too thick.
• Make sure your shoes ft well and provide
proper support for your feet. This is
especially important if you have diabetes
or arthritis. Shoes should feel comfortable
right from the start.
• Think of your shoes as safety equipment
for your feet. Check them regularly, and
replace them when they’re worn out.
You can tell you need new shoes when:
›  The tread on the bottom is worn down
›  Your feet (especially your arches)
feel tired after ac
tivity
›  Your shins, knees, or hips hurt after
activity

PAGE 25
Yes No 
Finding a Personal Trainer Who’s Right For You 
If you’re not used to exercising, you may want to work with a personal ftness trainer. One of the best  
ways to fnd a personal trainer is to get a referral from someone you know who has a great trainer. Ask  
your friends and family or your health care provider. You also can check with a local health club or  
senior center.  Once you have a couple of names, here are a few questions to help you pick the right  
person. If you can answer YES to most of these questions, you’re probably on the right track.   
Education and Experience 
Does the trainer have a certifcation from an accredited organization? For groups that certify personal trainers,   
exercise specialists, and ftness instruc tors, see the Institute for Credentialing Excellence on page 117. 
Does the trainer have education or experience in exercise science, aging, and program design? 
Does the trainer have at least 2 years of experience, including experience training people your age? 
Will the trainer be able to develop an exercise program based on your goals, abilities, and health?  
Has the trainer worked with people with your medical conditions? 
Does the trainer know how to personalize your exercises based on medications you take? 
Personality 
Did the trainer listen carefully to you and answer your questions? 
Does the trainer have a sense of humor and a personality that you like? 
Business Practices 
Has the trainer told you what to expect from the sessions? 
Are the costs of the sessions and the cancellation policy clearly stated? 
Is the trainer insured or bonded?  
Will the trainer give you a list of clients so you can check references? 
   CHAPTER 2: GET SET 23 


PAGE 26
3 
go! 


PAGE 27
   
 
 
  
  
   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
CHAPTER 3: GO! 25 
Now that you know about the many types of physical activity and you’ve set your goals, you’re ready to go! 
This chapter has tips to help y
ou get started, resume your activity if you’ve stopped, stay active, and even 
increase your activity level over time. 
Three Keys to Success 
To help you get started and keep going, 
here are three ways to approach exercise 
and physical activity. 
1. Include Physical Activity in
Your Everyday Life
Physical activity needs to be a regular, 
permanent habit to produce benefts. 
Again, the key word is you. Set yourself up 
to succeed right from the start by choosing 
activities that appeal to you, exercising safely, 
charting your progress to see your success, 
and making your activity routine ft your 
personal lifestyle. Here are a few ways to 
make physical activity a regular part of 
your daily life. 
Make it a priority. Many of us lead busy 
lives, and it’s easy to put physical activity 
at the bottom of the “to do” list. Remember, 
though, being active is one of the most 
important things you can do each day to 
maintain and improve your health. Make 
a point to include physical activities 
throughout your day. Try being active frst 
thing in the morning before you get busy. 
Think of your time to exercise as a special 
appointment, and mark it on your calendar. 
Make it easy. If it’s difcult or costs too 
much, you probably won’t be active. You 
are more likely to exercise if it’s easy to do. 
Put your 2-pound weights next to your easy 
chair so you can do some lifting while you 
watch TV. Walk up and down the soccer 
feld during your grandchild’s game. 


PAGE 28
Walk the entire mall or every aisle of the 
grocery store when you go shopping. When 
you go out to get the mail, walk around the 
block. Join a gym or ftness center that’s 
close to home. You can be active all at 
once, or break it up into smaller amounts 
throughout the day. Do more of the activities 
you already like and know how to do. 
Make it social. Enlist a friend or family 
member. Many people agree that having 
an “exercise buddy” keeps them going. 
Take a yoga class with a neighbor. If you 
don’t already have an exercise partner, 
fnd one by joining a walking club at your 
local mall or an exercise class at a nearby 
senior center. Take a walk during lunch 
with a co-worker. 
Make it interesting and make it fun. 
Do things you enjoy and pick up the pace 
a bit. If you love the outdoors, try biking, 
fshing, jogging, or hiking. Listen to music or 
an audiobook while walking, gardening, or 
raking. Plan a hiking trip at a nearby park. 
STICKING WITH IT: 
What Works 
You’re more likely to stay 
active if you: 
• Think you will benefit from
your activities
• Include activities you enjoy
• Feel you can do the
activities corr
ectly
• Believe the activities
are safe
• Have regular access to
the activities
• Can fit the activities into
your daily schedule
• Find that the activities are
affordable
• Can see the benefits of
regular exercise and
physical activity
Above all, make it an active decision. Seize 
opportunities. Choose to be active in many places 
and many ways: 
• When you unload the groceries, strengthen your 
arms by lifting the milk carton or a 1-pound can 
a few times before you put it away.
• When you go shopping, build your endurance
by parking the car at the far end of the parking
lot and walking briskly to the store. Or, get of
the bus one or two stops earlier than usual.
• Instead of calling or e-mailing a colleague at
work, go in person —
and take the stairs!
• Take a few extra
trips up and down
the steps at home
to strengthen
your legs and
build endurance.
• Try to do some of your
errands on foot rather
than in the car.
GO HERE FOR MORE INFO 
To learn how to do the exercises mentioned on this page, 
see Chapter 4 beginning on page 34. 
26   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY


PAGE 29
   
 
   
 
 
    
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 3: GO! 27 
• Multi-task the active way:
›  While you’re waiting in line, practice your
balancing skills by standing on one foot
for a few seconds, then the other.
Gradually build up your time.
›  While you’re talking on the phone, stand
up and do a few leg raises or toe stands to
strengthen your legs.
›  Take advantage of small bits of “down
time” to do an exercise or two. For
example, while you’
re waiting for the
cofee to brew or for your spouse to get
ready to go out, do a few wall push-ups or
calf stretches.
2. Try All Four Types of Exercise
Most people tend to focus on one activity or 
type of exercise and think they’re doing 
enough. The goal is to be creative and choose 
exercises from each of the four types we’ve 
talked about — endurance, strength, balance, 
and fexibility. Mixing it up will help you reap 
the benefts of each type of exercise, as well as 
reduce boredom and risk of injury. You can use 
the Weekly Exercise and Physical Activity Plan 
on page 104 to write down your activities. 
make it easy 
Finding enjoyable ways to add exercise to your life can be the ticket 
to success. See how Marian made it work for her: 
“I’m an active 62-year-old, but a family history of heart disease 
and high cholesterol convinced me that I needed more exercise. 
After I tried walking on a treadmill at a nearby community center, 
I knew I’d be happier outside. So, I got a step counter and started 
walking in my neighborhood. I’ve seen purple tulips bloom in 
spring and red dogwood leaves drop in the fall. I always come 
home with more energy for the rest of my day.” (For more on step 
counters, also called pedometers, see page 37.) 

PAGE 30
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
28   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
QUICK TIP 
If you’re thinking of 
moving to a retirement 
or assisted-living 
community, ask whether 
the community has a 
pool, exercise classes, 
walking trails, a golf 
course, or personal 
trainer. Does it have 
well-lit sidewalks so 
you can walk safely in 
the evening as well as 
during the day? Are 
there parks nearby? 
If you lift weights, alternate these exercises 
with time on the treadmill or stationary bike. 
End your routine with stretching exercises. 
If you focus mainly on endurance activities, 
be sure to add stretching, balance, or strength 
exercises to your routine. If you want to do 
strength exercises every day, alternate muscle 
groups, or exercise all of your muscle groups 
every other day. (See Weekly Exercise and 
Physical Activity Plan on page 104.) 
3. Plan for Breaks in the Routine
(Life Happens!)
Getting older can mean more time for trips 
to see children and grandchildren or vacations 
away from home. People retire and move to 
new houses or even new parts of the country. 
Sometimes the unexpected happens — family 
illness, caregiving responsibilities, or the death 
of a loved one. All of these events can interrupt 
your physical activity routines. 
These breaks can make it hard or even 
impossible at times to stick with your regular 
activities. But you can start again. Here are a 
few ideas to help you stay active or start again 
if you’ve had to stop: 
Don’t be too hard on yourself. Recognize that 
there will be times when you won’t want to 
exercise, or it feels too hard. You are not alone; 
everyone has those feelings. Just try to get back 
to your activities as soon as possible. The sooner 
you resume some sort of activity, the better 
you’ll feel, and the easier it will be to get back into 
your routine. 
Talk with your doctor about when you can 
resume your regular routine if you stopped 
exercising because of an illness or new 
symptoms. 
Think about the reasons you started exercising 
and the goals you set for yourself. Remembering 
your motivations and how much you’ve already 
accomplished may help recharge your batteries 
and get you started again. 
Ask family and friends to help you get back on 
track. Sometimes, you may want an exercise 
buddy. At other times, all you may need is a word 
of support. 
Try something easier or an activity you haven’t 
done recently if you don’t like the activity you 
started. You might even want to try something 
you’ve never done before. Mastering something 
simple or new may give you the confdence you 
need to resume a regular exercise program. 

PAGE 31
   
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 3: GO! 29 
Talk with your doctor or trainer.You 
may get the boost you need to move past 
the hurdle. 
Start again at a comfortable level if you 
haven’t exercised for several weeks. Then 
gradually build back up. With a little time, 
you’ll be back on track. 
Think creatively about other ways to 
exercise if you can’t do your regular 
physical activities because of bad weather 
or a change in your routine. For example, 
if caring for a loved one is keeping you 
indoors, try an exercise video, jog in place, 
dance around your living room, or walk up 
and down the stairs a few extra times. Just 
keep moving! 
Be fexible. When your grandchildren 
come for a visit, reschedule your exercise 
during their nap time, or take them with 
you for a walk. 
Believe in yourself! Feel confdent that 
even if your activity is interrupted, you 
can start again and be successful. Don’t 
worry about the time you missed. What’s 
important is to focus on your ftness goals 
and start again at whatever level is 
possible for you. 
Walking Safely in Rural Areas 
Rural areas may have less trafc than big cities, 
but “a walk in the country” does require special 
care. Often the vehicles on rural roads travel at 
much higher speeds than pedestrians are used 
to, and drivers won’t expect to see someone 
walking on or near the side of the road. So, 
remember the following safety rules, and enjoy 
your walk! 
• Always walk facing oncoming trafc.
• Look for a smooth, stable surface alongside
the road.
• If there are guardrails, see if there’s a smooth,
fat surface behind the barrier where you can
walk.
• If you need to walk on a paved shoulder, stay
as far away from trafc as possible.
• Watch for bridges and narrow shoulders. 
• Be sure drivers can see you. Wear brightly
colored clothing, and if you walk during
low-light hours — dusk or dawn — be sure
you have refective material on your jacket
or walking shoes and carry a fashlight.
• Take along a cell phone and an ID, especially
if walking alone.


PAGE 32
30   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
A few more tips on coping with breaks 
in your exercise routine 
Sometimes the reason you have to stop exercising is temporary; sometimes it’s permanent. There may be a change in your living 
arrangements or in your health, for example. Some are happy occasions; some are sad. Here are some ways to manage these breaks. 
Temporary Permanent 
A Change in
Your Situation 
You’re on vacation: 
• Many hotels now have ftness centers. Check out
the facilities where you’ll be staying, and bring
along your exercise clothing or equipment
(resistance band, bathing suit, or walking shoes).
• Get out and see the sights on foot rather than 
just by tour bus. 
Caring for an ill spouse is taking up much of your time: 
• Work out to an exercise video when your spouse 
is napping. 
• Ask a family member or friend to come over 
so you can go for a walk. 
Your usual exercise buddy moves away: 
• Ask another friend to go with you on your daily walk.
• Ask other older adults in your area where they go for walks
or what physical activity resources are available nearby.
• Join an exercise class at your local community center or 
senior center. This is a great way to meet other active people. 
You move to a new community: 
• Check out the ftness centers, parks, and recreation
associations in your new neighborhood. Look for activities
that match your interests and abilities.
• Get involved!
A Change in
Your Health 
The flu keeps you out of action for a few weeks: 
• Wait until you feel better and then start your
activity again.
• Gradually build back up to your previous level of
activity.
You are recovering from hip or back surgery: 
• Talk with your doctor about specifc exercises and
activities you can do safely when you’re feeling better.
• Start slowly and gradually build up your activities as you
become stronger.

PAGE 33
CHAPTER 3: GO!   31 
Building Up the Benefits  
Once you start exercising and becoming more  
physically active, you’ll begin to see results in  
just a few weeks — you’ll feel stronger and  
more energetic. You’ll notice that you can do  
things easier, faster, or for longer than before.  
This tells you that your body is getting used   
to a higher level of activity. Now is the time   
to build on those benefts by doing more.   
Keep your starting point in mind, though. For  
some people, switching from 1- to 2-pound  
weights is a big step forward. For others,  
building up to walking briskly or even running  
is a reasonable goal.  
No matter what your starting point: 
• Add new physical activities. Be creative! 
Try some new activities to keep your 
interest alive. Sign up for dance lessons. 
Talk to your friends about bowling  
together once a week. Join a water aerobics 
class. Save gas by walking to your nearby 
grocery store. Can you trade in any of your 
electric appliances for muscle-powered 
versions: How about your electric can 
opener? Your electric lawn mower? Your 
electric leaf blower? 
• Review your goals. If you are able, do your activities 
longer, farther, or harder. If you walk 30 minutes at 
lunch time every day, make it 40 minutes. If you only 
have 30 minutes for lunch, pick up the pace so you’re 
walking faster and farther in the same amount of 
time. Try using a step counter, or pedometer, to track 
your progress. Seeing the number of steps add up can 
be great motivation. If you usually swim half a mile, 
build up to three-quarters of a mile. Use a harder 
resistance band when you do strength exercises. 
• Do the activities more often.  Spend time in your 
garden more often. Head over to the gym three 
times a week instead of two. Walk every day. 
   
 
 
 
GO HERE FOR MORE INFO 
Healthy eating and physical activity go hand in 
hand. See Chapter 6, starting on page 94, for 
more on this topic. 

PAGE 34
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
make it safe 
For many people, even those who exercise regularly, breaks 
in the routine mean the end of daily exercise and its benefits. 
Freddi tells how she carefully got started again: 
“For more than 10 years, I jogged every day to clear the 
cobwebs and get my blood flowing. Imagine how awful I felt 
when I fell down the stairs and broke my ankle. At 54, I wasn’t 
ready to be a couch potato. After the cast came off, I had 
physical therapy. I worried about hurting my ankle again, but I 
wasn’t going to let the injury keep me down. At first, I walked 
slowly in my neighborhood, but I didn’t want to trip on uneven 
pavement. My physical therapist suggested I try a treadmill 
instead. Now, I go to the gym after work. I set the treadmill 
incline high, turn on my headphones, and walk. Sometimes, I 
listen to music or a book on CD. I miss the fresh air, but I don’t 
think about falling, and my stamina is back. Plus, I’ve added 
strength and balance exercises to my routine. In many ways, 
I’m in better shape now than before the fall and that feels great!” 
Reducing the Risks 
Many people hesitate to exercise for one reason 
or another. In fact, exercise and moderate 
physical activity, such as brisk walking, are safe 
for almost all older adults. Even so, avoiding 
injury is an important thing to keep in mind, 
especially if you’re just starting a new activity 
or you haven’t been active for a long time. Talk 
to your doctor if you have an ongoing health 
condition or certain other health problems (see 
page 22) or if you haven’t seen your doctor for 
a while. Ask how physical activity can help you, 
whether you should avoid certain activities, and 
how to modify exercises to ft your situation. 
You may feel some minor discomfort or muscle 
soreness when you start to exercise. This should 
go away as you get used to the activities. However, 
if you feel sick to your stomach or have strong 
pain, you’ve done too much. Go easier and then 
gradually build up. 
GO HERE FOR MORE INFO 
See Chapter 4 for more safety tips. 

PAGE 35
   
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
   
 
 
  
 
Preventing Injury 
CHAPTER 3: GO! 33 
The health benefts of exercise far outweigh  
any risks of injury. However, you can take  
some precautions to exercise safely.  
Follow these tips to avoid injury: 
• When starting an exercise program, begin
slowly with low-intensity exercises.
• Wait at least 2 hours after eating a large
meal before doing strenuous exercise.
• Wear appropriate shoes for your activity
and comfortable, loose-ftting clothing that
allows you to move freely but won’t catch
on other objects.
• Warm up with low-intensity exercises at
the beginning of each exercise session.
• Drink water before, during, and after your
exercise session.
• When exercising outdoors, pay attention
to your surroundings — consider possible
trafc hazards, the weather, uneven
walking surfaces, and strangers.
Stop exercising if you: 
• Have pain or pressure in your chest,
neck, shoulder, or arm
• Feel dizzy or sick to your stomach
• Break out in a cold sweat
• Have muscle cramps
• Feel severe pain in joints,  
feet, ankles, or legs


PAGE 36
4 
sample exercises 

PAGE 37
CHAPTER 4: SAMPLE EXERCISES   35 
Many different exercises can improve your health and independence. Whether you do the exercises shown   
in this chapter or other physical activities that accomplish the same goals, gradually work your way up to  
include endurance, strength, balance, and flexibility exercises.  
It’s important to spend about 5 minutes at the  
beginning and end of your routine to warm up  
and cool down. Warming up and cooling down  
give your muscles a chance to get ready to  
work and gradually return to rest at the end.  
These “before-and-after” activities help  
prevent injury and reduce muscle soreness  
later. Here are a few suggestions:  
• Do some light endurance activity frst, such 
as walking for 5 minutes. If you’re going to 
be walking briskly or running, gradually 
build up to that pace. At the end of your 
activity, gradually slow down and let your 
body cool down.
• Do a few exercises to work the muscles and 
joints you’ll be using in your activity. For 
example, if you’re going to be swimming, do 
a few arm exercises frst to warm up your 
arms and shoulders.
• If you’re going to include stretching 
exercises as part of your routine,  
do them afterwards. 
   


PAGE 38
 
 
 
  
  
 
36   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
endurance
make it rewarding 
Regular endurance exercise has helped Tom stay healthy after 
major heart surgery: 
“At age 45 I had quadruple bypass surgery. I was shocked because 
I was so young. Those months after my surgery are a blur to me 
now. After several months of cardiac rehab, I knew my heart health 
was in my hands. So, now I run regularly at my neighborhood 
YMCA 
—  around the track in nice weather and on the treadmill 
during the winter. I admit I was nervous at first to push myself. 
I worried I might do more harm than good. But, it’s been 12 years 
and I feel great! This year, I will celebrate my daughter’s graduation 
from college, continue to root for the Aggies, and maybe even 
teach my wife to play golf. I believe exercise has made all of that 
possible for me.” 

PAGE 39
How to Improve Your Endurance 
Endurance exercises are activities — walking,  
jogging, swimming, raking, sweeping, dancing,  
playing tennis — that increase your heart rate  
and breathing for an extended period of time.  
They will make it easier for you to walk farther,  
faster, or uphill. They also should make everyday  
activities such as gardening, shopping, or playing  
a sport easier. 
How Much, How Often 
Refer to your starting goals, and build up your  
endurance gradually. If you haven’t been active  
for a long time, it’s especially important to  
work your way up over time. It may take a while  
to go from a longstanding inactive lifestyle to  
doing some of the activities in this section. For  
example, start out with 5 or 10 minutes at a 
time, and then build up to at least 30 minutes of  
moderate-intensity endurance activity. Doing  
less than 10 minutes at a time won’t give you  
the desired heart and lung benefts.  
Try to build up to at least 30 minutes of  
moderate-intensity endurance activity on  
most or all days of the week. Every day is best.  
Remember, though, that these are goals, not  
rules. Some people will be able to do more. 
Step counters, also called pedometers, 
can help you keep track  of  your 
endurance activity, set goals, and  
measure progress. Most inactive  
people get fewer than 5,000 steps a  
day, and some very inactive people  
get only 2,000 steps a day.  
Wear the step counter for a few days to see how you’re doing.  
You can use the Endurance Daily Record on page 105 to  
record your steps.  If you get: 
• Fewer than 5,000 steps a day, gradually  
try to add 3,000 to 4,000 more steps a day.
• About 8,000 steps a day, you’re probably 
meeting the recommended activity target.
• 10,000 or more steps a day, you can be 
confdent that you’re getting an 
adequate amount of endurance activity.
• 10 ,000 steps a day comfortably, try  
for 15,000 steps a day, which would  
put you in the high-activity group.
Counting Your Steps 
   
 
CHAPTER 4: SAMPLE EXERCISES   37 

PAGE 40
Others, however, may not be able to exercise  
for 30 minutes at a time. It’s important to set  
realistic goals based on your own health and  
abilities. 
Safety 
Listen to your body. Is the activity making you  
feel unwell or too tired? Endurance activities  
should not make you breathe so hard that you  
can’t talk. They should not cause dizziness,  
chest pain or pressure, or a feeling like  
heartburn.  
Do a little light activity, such as easy walking,  
before and after your endurance activities to  
warm up and cool down.  
As you get older, you may not feel thirsty even  
though your body needs fuids. Be sure to drink  
liquids when doing any activity that makes you  
sweat. By the time you notice you are thirsty,  
you probably are already low on fuid. This  
guideline is important year round, but it’s  
especially important in hot weather. If your  
doctor has told you to limit your fuids, be sure  
to check before increasing the amount of fuid  
you drink while exercising. For example, people  
with congestive heart failure or kidney disease  
may need to limit fuids.  
Older adults can be afected by heat and cold  
more than others. In extreme cases, too   
much heat can cause heat stroke, and very  
cold temperatures can lead to a dangerous  
drop in body temperature. If you are going to  
be outdoors, dress in layers so you can add or  
remove clothes as needed. When it’s not  
possible to be outdoors, you may want to   
try indoor activities: 
• If you have stairs at home, go up and  
down the steps a few times in a row.
• Walk at the mall or grocery store.
• Go for a swim at your local ftness or 
recreation center.
Whatever activity you choose, stay safe.   
To prevent injuries, be sure to use safety  
equipment. For example, wear a helmet when  
bicycling. When you’re walking, watch out for  
low-hanging branches and uneven sidewalks.  
Walk during the day or in well-lit areas at  
night, and be aware of your surroundings.   
Ask someone to go with you. Wear the   
proper shoes (see page 22). 
QUICK TIP 
Some people are afraid   
to exercise after a heart  
attack. But regular 
physical activity can help  
reduce your chances of  
having another heart  
attack. 
If you’ve had a heart  
attack, talk with your  
doctor to be sure you’re  
following a safe, effective  
physical activity program.  
Ask about cardiac rehab  
programs, which include  
exercise, education, and  
counseling to help you  
return to an active life. 
GO HERE FOR MORE INFO  
For more about drinking enough   
fluids, see page 97. 
Walking 2 miles a day   
at the mall will help   
you keep up with your  
grandchildren during   
a trip to the park. 
Making  
It  REAL 
 
38   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY


PAGE 41
 
Progressing  
When you’re ready to do more, build up the  
amount of time you spend doing endurance  
activities frst, then build up the difculty of  
your activities. For example, gradually  
increase your time to 30 minutes over several  
days to weeks (or even months, depending on  
your condition) by walking longer distances.  
Then walk more briskly or up steeper hills. See  
page 13 for more examples of physical activities  
that build endurance. To record your activities,  
use the Endurance Daily Record on page 105. 
Ways to Gauge Your Effort 
The amount of efort you need to do an ac tivity will  
depend on your starting point, including your  
ftness level, how strong you are, and how ac tive  
you’ve been. For example, walking a mile in  
15 minutes will be a lot easier for someone who does  
it every day  compared with someone who has never  
done it. You can use these informal guidelines to  
estimate how much efort you are putting into your  
endurance activities: 
 
•  Brisk walking is an example of moderate  
activity, while jogging is a vigorous activity. 
•  Talking is easy during moderate activity.  
During vigorous activity, talking is difcult.  
•  If you tend to sweat, you probably won’t  
sweat during light activity (except on hot  
days). You will sweat during vigorous or  
sustained moderate activity. Remember  
to drink fuids even if you don’t sweat.  
One doctor who specializes in exercise for older  
adults tells her patients the following about how  
hard they should work during endurance activities:  
“If you can’t talk while you’re exercising, it’s too  
difcult. If you can sing a song, it’s too easy!” 
CHAPTER 4: SAMPLE EXERCISES   39 

PAGE 42
40   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
strength
make it affordable  
Exercising at home is just one way to be active. We feature it  
because most older people can do it, but you also might try  
Bonita’s example: 
“I’m 69 and live on my Social Security income. My kids try to spoil  
me, but I’d rather do things on my own as much as possible. When  
looking for a fitness center where I could use strength-building  
equipment, I bargained the owner down to a monthly fee that I  
could afford. I started with 1-pound weights and gradually moved  
on to heavier weights. I also added stretching to my routine. I’ve  
always been active, but never as much as I am now. Joining the  
fitness center has done me a world of good. The owner of my club  
holds me up as an example, and my family is so proud of me.” 
 


PAGE 43
CHAPTER 4: SAMPLE EXERCISES   41 
How to Improve Your Strength 
Even very small changes in muscle strength  
can make a real diference in function,  
especially in people who have already lost a lot  
of muscle. An increase in muscle that you can’t  
even see can make it easier to do everyday  
things like get up from a chair, climb stairs,  
carry groceries, open jars, and even play with  
your grandchildren. Lower-body strength  
exercises also will improve your balance. 
About Strength Exercises 
To do most of the strength exercises in this book,  
you need to lift or push weights. You can use  
weights, resistance bands, or common objects  
from your home. Or, you can use the  
strength-training equipment at a ftness  
center or gym. Start with light weights and  
gradually increase the amount of weight you use.  
How Much, How Often  
Try to do strength exercises for all of your  
major muscle groups on 2 or more days per  
week for 30-minute sessions each, but don’t  
exercise the same muscle group on any 2 days  
in a row. (Use the Weekly Exercise and  
Physical Activity Plan on page 104.)  
• Depending on your condition, you might 
need to start out using 1- or 2-pound 
weights, or no weight at all. Your body 
needs to get used to strength exercises. 
• Use a light weight the frst week, then 
gradually add more weight. Starting out 
with weights that are too heavy can  
cause injuries. 
   


PAGE 44
 
42   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY 
•  Gradually add more weight in order to  
beneft from strength exercises. You   
need to challenge your muscles to get the  
most beneft from strength exercises.   
(The Progressing section on page 43 will   
tell you how.)  
•  It should feel somewhere between hard  
and very hard for you to lift or push the  
weight. It shouldn’t feel very, very hard.   
If you can’t lift or push a weight 8 times   
in a row, it’s too heavy for you. Reduce   
the amount of weight.  
•  Take 3 seconds to lift or push a weight into  
place, hold the position for 1 second , and  
take another 3 seconds to return to your  
starting position. Don’t let the weight drop;  
returning it slowly is very important.  
•  Try to do 10 to 15 repetitions for each  
exercise. Think of this as a goal. If you can’t  
do that many at frst, do as many as you  
can. You may be able to build up to this   
goal over time. 
QUICK TIP  
A repetition, or rep, is  
one complete movement  
of an exercise, and a set   
is one group of reps. 
In this guide, a set of 
strength exercises is   
10 to 15 repetitions. You  
can use the Strength  
Daily Record on page 106  
to  keep track of the num-
ber  of strength exercises  
you do. 
Making  
It  REAL 
Want to be able to lift  
your carry-on bag into  
the overhead bin of the  
airplane or get in and   
out of the car more  
easily? Keep doing   
those strength exercises,  
and you’ll get there. 
Safety 
•  Talk with your doctor if you are unsure about  
doing a particular exercise. For example, if  
you’ve had hip or back surgery, talk about  
which exercises might be best for you.  
•  Don’t hold your breath during strength  
exercises. Holding your breath while straining  
can cause changes in blood pressure. This is  
especially true for people with heart disease.  
•  Breathe regularly. Breathe in slowly through  
your nose and breathe out slowly through  
your mouth. If this is not comfortable or  
possible, breathe in and out through either  
your nose or mouth.  
•  Breathe out as you lift or push, and breathe  
in as you relax. For example, if you’re doing  
leg lifts, breathe out as you lift your leg, and  
breathe in as you lower it. This may not feel  
natural at frst, and you probably will have  
to think about it for a while as you do it.  
•  Proper form and safety go hand-in-hand .  
For some exercises, you may want to start  
alternating arms and work your way up to  
using both arms at the same time. If it is  
difcult for you to hold hand weights, try  
using wrist weights. 
•  To prevent injury, don’t jerk or thrust weights  
into position. Use smooth, steady movements.  
•  Avoid “locking” your arm and leg joints in   
a tightly straightened position. To straighten  
your knees, tighten your thigh muscles.  
This will lift your kneecaps and protect them.  

PAGE 45
   
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
CHAPTER 4: SAMPLE EXERCISES   43 
• For many of the sample exercises in this
guide, you will need to use a chair. Choose
a sturdy chair that is stable enough to
support your weight when seated or
when holding on during the exercise.
• Muscle soreness lasting a few days and slight 
fatigue are normal after muscle-building
exercises, at least at frst. After doing these
exercises for a few weeks, you will probably
not be sore after your workout. 
Progressing 
Muscle strength is progressive over time. 
Gradually increase the amount of weight 
you use to build strength. When you can do 
2 sets of 10 to 15 repetitions easily, increase 
the amount of weight at your next session. 
Here’s an example of how to progress  
gradually: St
art out with a weight that you can  
lift only 8 times. Keep using that weight until  
you become strong enough to lift it easily 10 to  
15 times. When you can do 2 sets of 10 to 15  
repetitions easily, add more weight so that,  
again, you can lift it only 8 times. Keep  
repeating until you reach your goal, and then  
maintain that level as long as you can. 
FOR HOUSEHOLD  
HANDWEIGHTS   
See page 45
QUICK TIP 
Challenge yourself, but 
listen to your body, and 
use common sense when 
you exercise. 
If you feel sick or have 
pain during or after 
exercise, you’re doing 
too much. 
Exhaustion, sore joints, 
and painful muscle 
pulling mean you’re 
overdoing it. None of 
the exercises should 
cause severe pain. 
Over-exercising can 
cause injury, which 
may lead to quitting 
altogether. A steady 
rate of progress is 
the best approach. 


PAGE 46
Working with a Resistance Band Resistance bands are stretchy elastic bands that come in  
several strengths, from light to heavy. You can use them in  
some strength exercises instead of weights. 
Wrapping   
a resistance  
band 
1. Lay the band fat in your hand with
the end toward your pinky fnger.
2. Wrap the long end of the
band around the back of
your hand.
3. Grasp frmly.
If you are a beginner, try exercising without the band until you are comfortable, then add the band. Choose a  
light band if you are just starting to exercise, and move on to a stronger band when you can do 2 sets of 10 to  
15 repetitions easily. Hold on to the band tightly (some bands have handles), or wrap it around your hand or  
foot to keep it from slipping and causing possible injury. Do the exercises in a slow, controlled manner, and  
don’t let the band snap back. 
44   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY

PAGE 47
   
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 4: SAMPLE EXERCISES   45 
Working with Weights 
You don’t have to go out and buy weights for 
strength exercises. Find something you can hold 
on to easily. For example, you can make your own 
weights from unbreakable household items: 
• Fill a plastic milk jug with sand or water and 
tape the opening securely closed. 
• Fill a sock with dried beans, and tie up the 
open end. 
• Use common grocery items, such as bags 
of rice, vegetable or soup cans, or bottled 
water. 
Hand Grip 
This simple exercise should help if you have 
trouble picking things up or holding on to 
them. It also will help you open things like 
that pickle jar more easily. You can even do 
this exercise while reading or watching TV. 
1. Hold a tennis ball or other small rubber 
or foam ball in one hand. 
2. Slowly squeeze the ball as hard as you 
can and hold it for 3-5 seconds. 
3. Relax the squeeze slowly. 
4. Repeat 10-15 times. 
5. Repeat 10-15 times with other hand. 
6. Repeat 10-15 times more with each hand. 


PAGE 48
46   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
Wrist Curl 
This exercise will strengthen your wrists. It also will help 
ensure good form and prevent injury when you do upper 
body strength exercises. 
1. Rest your forearm on the arm of a 
sturdy chair with your hand over 
the edge. 
2. Hold weight with palm facing upward. 
3. Slowly bend your wrist up and down. 
4. Repeat 10-15 times. 
5. Repeat with other hand 10-15 times. 
6. Repeat 10-15 more times with 
each hand. 

PAGE 49
CHAPTER 4: SAMPLE EXERCISES   47 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Overhead Arm Raise 
This exercise will strengthen your shoulders and arms. It 
should make swimming and other activities such as lifting 
and carrying grandchildren easier. 
1. You can do this exercise while standing
or sitting in a sturdy, armless chair.
2. Keep your feet fat on the foor,
shoulder-width apart.
3. Hold weights at your sides at shoulder
height with palms facing forward.
Breathe in slowly.
4. Slowly breathe out as you raise both
arms up over your head keeping your
elbows slightly bent.
5. Hold the position for 1 second.
6. Breathe in as you slowly lower
your arms.
7. Repeat 10-15 times.
8. Rest; then repeat 10-15 more times.
As you progress, use a heavier 
weight and alternate arms until 
you can lift the weight comfortably 
with both arms. 

PAGE 50
48   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
Front Arm Raise 
This exercise for your shoulders can help you put things up  
on a shelf or take them down more easily.  
1. Stand with your feet shoulder-width
apart.
2. Hold weights straight down at your
sides, with palms facing backward.
3. Keeping them straight, breathe out
as you raise both arms in front of
you to shoulder height.
4. Hold the position for 1 second.
5. Breathe in as you slowly lower arms.
6. Repeat 10-15 times.
7. Rest; then repeat 10-15 more times.
As you progress, use a heavier 
weight and alternate arms until 
you can lift the weight comfortably 
with both arms. 

PAGE 51
CHAPTER 4: SAMPLE EXERCISES   49 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
Side Arm Raise 
This exercise will strengthen your shoulders and make 
lifting groceries easier. 
1. You can do this exercise while standing
or sitting in a sturdy, armless chair.
2. Keep your feet fat on the foor,
shoulder-width apart.
3. Hold hand weights straight down at
your sides with palms facing inward.
Breathe in slowly.
4. Slowly breathe out as you raise both
arms to the side, shoulder height.
5. Hold the position for 1 second.
6. Breathe in as you slowly lower your
arms.
7. Repeat 10-15 times.
8. Rest; then repeat 10-15 more times.
As you progress, use a heavier 
weight and alternate arms until 
you can lift the weight comfortably 
with both arms. 

PAGE 52
50   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Arm Curl 
After a few weeks of doing this exercise for your upper arm 
muscles, lifting that gallon of milk will be much easier. 
1. Stand with your feet shoulder-width
apart.
2. Hold weights straight down at your
sides, palms facing forward. Breathe
in slowly.
3. Breathe out as you slowly bend your
elbows and lift weights toward chest.
Keep elbows at your sides.
4. Hold the position for 1 second.
5. Breathe in as you slowly lower
your arms.
6. Repeat 10-15 times.
7. Rest; then repeat 10-15 more times.
As you progress, use a heavier 
weight and alternate arms until 
you can lift the weight comfortably 
with both arms. 

PAGE 53
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
CHAPTER 4: SAMPLE EXERCISES   51 
Arm Curl  
with Resistance Band 
This variation of the Arm Curl uses a resistance band instead 
of weights. (See Working with a Resistance Band on page 44.) 
1. Sit in a sturdy, armless chair with
your feet fat on the foor, shoulder-
width apart.
2. Place the center of the resistance band
under both feet. Hold each end of the
band with palms facing inward. Keep
elbows at your sides. Breathe in slowly.
3. Keep wrists straight and slowly breathe
out as you bend your elbows and bring
your hands toward your shoulders.
4. Hold the position for 1 second.
5. Breathe in as you slowly lower
your arms.
6. Repeat 10-15 times.
7. Rest; then repeat 10-15 more times.
As you progress, use a heavier 
strength band. 

PAGE 54
52   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Seated Row  
with Resistance Band 
This exercise to strengthen upper back, shoulder, and neck muscles  
should make everyday activities such as raking and vacuuming  
easier. (See Working with a Resistance Band on page 44.) 
1. Sit in a sturdy, armless chair with
your feet fat on the foor, shoulder-
width apart.
2. Place the center of the resistance band
under both feet. Hold each end of the
band with palms facing inward.
3. Relax your shoulders and extend
your arms beside your legs. Breathe
in slowly.
4. Breathe out slowly and pull both
elbows back until your hands are
at your hips.
5. Hold position for 1 second.
6. Breathe in as you slowly return your
hands to the starting position.
7. Repeat 10-15 times.
8. Rest; then repeat 10-15 more times.
As you progress, use a heavier 
strength band. 


PAGE 55
CHAPTER 4: SAMPLE EXERCISES   53 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wall Push-Up 
These push-ups will strengthen your arms, shoulders, and chest. 
Try this exercise during a TV commercial break. 
1. Face a wall, standing a little farther
than arm’s length away, feet shoulder-
width apart.
2. Lean your body forward and put your
palms fat against the wall at shoulder
height and shoulder-width apart.
3. Slowly breathe in as you bend your
elbows and lower your upper body
toward the wall in a slow, controlled
motion. Keep your feet fat on the foor.
4. Hold the position for 1 second.
5. Breathe out and slowly push yourself
back until your arms are straight.
6. Repeat 10-15 times.
7. Rest; then repeat 10-15 more times.

PAGE 56
54   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
Elbow Extension
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
This exercise will strengthen your upper arms. If your 
shoulders aren’t flexible enough to do this exercise, try 
the Chair Dip on page 55. 
1. You can do this exercise while standing
or sitting in a sturd
y, armless chair.
2. Keep your feet fat on the foor ,
shoulder-width apart.
3. Hold weight in one hand with palm
facing in
ward. Raise that arm toward
ceiling.
4. Support this arm below elbow with
other hand
. Breathe in slowly.
5. Slowly bend raised arm at elbow and
bring wei
ght toward shoulder.
6. Hold position for 1 second.
7. Breathe out and slowly straighten your
arm over your head
. Be careful not to
lock your elbow.
8. Repeat 10-15 times.
9. Repeat 10-15 times with other arm.
10. Repeat 10-15 more times with each arm.
If it’s difficult for you to hold hand 
weights, try using wrist weights. 

PAGE 57
CHAPTER 4: SAMPLE EXERCISES   55 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 Chair Dip 
This pushing motion will strengthen your arm muscles even 
if you are not able to lift yourself up off the chair. 
1. Sit in a sturdy chair with armrests 
with your feet fat on the foor, 
shoulder-width apart. 
2. Lean slightly forward; keep your 
back and shoulders straight. 
3. Grasp arms of chair with your hands 
next to you. Breathe in slowly. 
4. Breathe out and use your arms to 
push your body slowly of the chair. 
5. Hold position for 1 second. 
6. Breathe in as you slowly lower 
yourself back down. 
7. Repeat 10-15 times. 
8. Rest; then repeat 10-15 more times. 

PAGE 58
56   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
Back Leg Raise 
This exercise strengthens your buttocks and lower back. For an  
added challenge, you can modify the exercise to improve your  
balance. (See  Progressing to Improve Balance on page 68.)
1. Stand behind a sturdy chair, holding
on for balance. Breathe in slowly.
2. Breathe out and slowly lift one leg
straight back without bending your
knee or pointing your toes. Try not
to lean forward. The leg you are
standing on should be slightly bent.
3. Hold position for 1 second.
4. Breathe in as you slowly lower
your leg.
5. Repeat 10-15 times.
6. Repeat 10-15 times with other leg.
7. Repeat 10-15 more times with each leg.
As you progress, you may want 
to add ankle weights. 


PAGE 59
CHAPTER 4: SAMPLE EXERCISES   57 
   
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
   
Side Leg Raise 
This exercise strengthens hips, thighs, and buttocks. For an added 
challenge, you can modify the exercise to improve your balance. 
(See Progressing to Improve Balance on page 68.) 
1. Stand behind a sturdy chair with
feet slightly apart, holding on for
balance. Breathe in slowly.
2. Breathe out and slowly lift one
leg out to the side. Keep your back
straight and your toes facing
forward. The leg you are standing
on should be slightly bent.
3. Hold position for 1 second.
4. Breathe in as you slowly lower
your leg.
5. Repeat 10-15 times.
6. Repeat 10-15 times with other leg.
7. Repeat 10-15 more times with
each leg.
As you progress, you may want 
to add ankle weights. 

PAGE 60
58   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY 
Knee Curl 
Walking and climbing stairs are easier when you do both the  
Knee Curl and Leg Straightening exercises. For an added  
challenge, you can modify the exercise to improve your balance.  
(See Progressing to Improve Balance on page 68.) 
1. Stand behind a sturdy chair, holding  
on for balance. Lift one leg straight  
back without bending your knee or 
pointing your toes. Breathe in slowly. 
2. Breathe out as you slowly bring 
your heel up toward your buttocks 
as far as possible. Bend only from 
your knee, and keep your hips still. 
The leg you are standing on should 
be slightly bent. 
3. Hold position for 1 second. 
4. 
 
 
Breathe in as you slowly lower  
your foot to the foor. 
5.  Repeat 10-15 times. 
6.  Repeat 10-15 times with other leg. 
7.  Repeat 10-15 more times with  
each leg. 
As you progress, you may want  
to add ankle weights. 

PAGE 61
CHAPTER 4: SAMPLE EXERCISES   59 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
Leg Straightening 
This exercise strengthens your thighs and may reduce 
symptoms of arthritis of the knee. 
1. Sit in a sturdy chair with your back
supported by the chair. Only the balls
of your feet and your toes should rest
on the foor. Put a rolled bath towel at
the edge of the chair under thighs for
support. Breathe in slowly.
2. Breathe out and slowly extend one leg
in front of you as straight as possible,
but don’t lock your knee.
3. Flex foot to point toes toward the
ceiling. Hold position for 1 second.
4. Breathe in as you slowly lower leg back
down.
5. Repeat 10-15 times.
6. Repeat 10-15 times with other leg.
7. Repeat 10-15 more times with each leg.
As you progress, you may want to 
add ankle weights. 

PAGE 62
60   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
Chair Stand 
This exercise, which strengthens your abdomen and thighs, will make  
it easier to get in and out of the car. If you have knee or back  
problems, talk with your doctor before trying this exercise.  
1. Sit toward the front of a sturdy,
armless chair with knees bent and feet
fat on foor, shoulder-width apart.
2. Lean back with your hands crossed
over your chest. Keep your back
and shoulders straight throughout
exercise. Breathe in slowly.
3. Breathe out and bring your upper body
forward until sitting upright.
4. Extend your arms so they are parallel
to the foor and slowly stand up.
5. Breathe in as you slowly sit down.
6. Repeat 10-15 times.
7.  Rest; then repeat 10-15 more times.


PAGE 63
CHAPTER 4: SAMPLE EXERCISES   61 
People with back problems should start the exercise from the sitting upright position.  

PAGE 64
62   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
Toe Stand 
This exercise will help make walking easier by strengthening your  
calves and ankles. For an added challenge, you can modify the  
exercise to improve your balance. (See  Progressing to Improve  
Balance on page 68.) 
1. Stand behind a sturdy chair, feet
shoulder-width apart, holding on  
for balance. Breathe in slowly.
2. Breathe out and slowly stand on
tiptoes, as high as possible.
3. Hold position for 1 second.
4. Breathe in as you slowly lower heels  
to the foor.
5. Repeat 10-15 times.
6. Rest; then repeat 10-15 more times.
 
 
 As you progress, try doing the  
exercise standing on one leg at  
a time for a total of 10-15 times  
on each leg. 


PAGE 65
CHAPTER 4: SAMPLE EXERCISES   63 
balance
make it a habit 
Lian, age 68, has found that regular tai chi classes have improved  
her balance and flexibility: 
“Early every morning, I join a group of my neighbors, and we  
practice tai chi for about an hour. We start out with a gentle 
warm-up and breathing exercises. Then our teacher shows us 
how to do certain poses and leads us step by step through the  
slow,  flowing  movements. We end with cooling down exercises.  
This  exercise  routine has boosted my confidence and reduced  
my fear of falling. It also keeps my arthritis under control.” 


PAGE 66
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
64   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
Making 
It REAL 
You’re walking in the 
neighborhood and you 
hear a bicycle bell behind 
you. Knowing you can turn 
around quickly and move 
out of the way without 
losing your balance is a 
great feeling! 
How to Improve Your Balance 
Each year, more than 2 million older 
Americans go to the emergency room because 
of fall-related injuries. A simple fall can cause 
a serious fracture of the arm, hand, ankle, or 
hip. Balance exercises can help you prevent 
falls and avoid the disability that may result 
from falling. 
How Much, How Often 
You can do the balance exercises in this 
section as often as you like. They overlap with 
the lower-body strength exercises, which also 
can improve your balance. Do the strength 
exercises 2 or more days per week, but not on 
any 2 days in a row. 
Safety 
• Have a sturdy chair or a person nearby
to hold on to if you feel unsteady.
• Talk with your doctor if you are unsure
about doing a particular exercise.
Progressing 
These exercises can improve your balance 
even more if you modify them as you progress. 
Start by holding on to a sturdy chair for 
support. To challenge yourself, try holding 
on to the chair with only one hand; then with 
time, you can try holding on with only one 
fnger, then no hands. If you are steady on 
your feet, try doing the exercise with your 
eyes closed. (See Progressing to Improve 
Balance on page 68.) 
Anytime, Anywhere Balance 
Exercises 
You can do exercises to improve your balance 
almost anytime, anywhere, and as often as 
you like, as long as you have something 
sturdy nearby to hold on to if you become 
unsteady. In the beginning, using a chair or 
the wall for support will help you work on 
your balance safely. 

PAGE 67
Stand on One Foot 
You can do this exercise while waiting for the bus or standing in line at 
the grocery. For an added challenge, you can modify the exercise to 
improve your balance. (See Progressing to Improve Balance on page 68.) 
1. Stand on one foot behind a sturdy
chair, holding on for balance.
2. Hold position for up to 10 seconds.
3. Repeat 10-15 times.
4. Repeat 10-15 times with other leg.
5. Repeat 10-15 more times with each leg .
CHAPTER 4: SAMPLE EXERCISES   65 


PAGE 68
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
66   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
Heel-to-Toe Walk 
Having good balance is important for many everyday activities, 
such as going up and down stairs. 
1. Position the heel of one foot just in
front of the toes of the other foot.
Your heel and toes should touch or
almost touch.
2. Choose a spot ahead of you and focus
on it to keep you steady as you walk.
3. Take a step. Put your heel just in front
of the toes of your other foot.
4. Repeat for 20 steps.
If you are unsteady on your feet, try 
doing this exercise near a wall so you 
can steady yourself if you need to. 


PAGE 69
CHAPTER 4: SAMPLE EXERCISES   67 
Balance Walk 
Good balance helps you walk safely and avoid tripping  
and falling over objects in your way. 
1. Raise arms to sides, shoulder height.
2. Choose a spot ahead of you and focus
on it to keep you steady as you walk.
3. Walk in a straight line with one foot in
front of the other.
4. 
 
 
As you walk, lift your back leg. Pause
for 1 second before stepping forward.
5. Repeat for 20 steps, alternating legs .
As you progress, try looking from  
side to side as you walk, but skip this  
step if you have inner ear problems.  


PAGE 70
68   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
Progressing to Improve Balance 
The exercises in this guide — especially those to strengthen your legs and 
ankles — can help improve your balance. As you progress, try adding the 
challenges shown below to help even more. For example, start by holding on 
to a sturdy chair with both hands for support. To challenge yourself further, 
try holding on to the chair with only one hand. As you feel steady, try using 
just one fnger to balance you. Then, try balancing without holding on. When 
you are steady on your feet, try doing the exercises with your eyes closed. 
You can use these modifcations with the following exercises: 
Back Leg Raise  (page 56) 
Side Leg Raise  (page 57) 
Knee Curl  (page 58) 
Toe Stand  (page 62) 


PAGE 71
CHAPTER 4: SAMPLE EXERCISES   69 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
flexibility
make it happen  
Grace, age 66, has found that stretching exercises have become 
an important addition to her new exercise routine: 
“I grew up on a farm and continued farming after I married. So, 
I was used to hard work and plenty of physical activity. When 
my son and his family took over running the farm, I needed to 
start a new exercise routine. Now, I begin most mornings with a 
walk and stretches. Good thing, too! The stretching keeps me 
limber, and the walking gives me plenty of stamina to keep up 
with my seven grandchildren. Exercise helps me stay active in 
their lives, and that makes it all worthwhile.” 

PAGE 72
70   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Making 
It REAL 
How easy is it for you 
to turn around and 
look behind you before 
backing out of a parking 
space? What about 
bending down to tie 
your shoes? Flexibility 
exercises will help you 
do both more easily! 
How to Improve Your Flexibility 
Stretching, or fexibility, exercises are an 
important part of your physical activity 
program. They give you more freedom of 
movement for your physical activities and for 
everyday activities such as getting dressed 
and reaching objects on a shelf. Stretching 
exercises can improve your fexibility but will 
not improve your endurance or strength. 
How Much, How Often 
• Do each stretching exercise 3 to 5 times at 
each session. 
• Slowly stretch into the desired position, 
as far as possible without pain, and hold the 
stretch for 10 to 30 seconds. Relax, breathe, 
then repeat, trying to stretch farther. 
Safety 
• Talk with your doctor if you are unsure 
about a particular exercise. For example, if 
you’ve had hip or back surgery, talk with 
your doctor before doing lower-body 
exercises. 
• Always warm up before stretching 
exercises. Stretch after endurance or 
strength exercises. If you are doing only 
stretching exercises, warm up with a few 
minutes of easy walking frst. Stretching 
your muscles before they are warmed up 
may result in injury. 
• Always remember to breathe normally 
while holding a stretch. 
• Stretching may feel slightly uncomfortable; 
for example, a mild pulling feeling is 
normal. 
• You are stretching too far if you feel sharp 
or stabbing pain, or joint pain — while 
doing the stretch or even the next day. 
Reduce the stretch so that it doesn’t hurt. 
• Never “bounce” into a stretch. Make slow, 
steady movements instead. Jerking into 
position can cause muscles to tighten, 
possibly causing injury. 
• Avoid “locking” your joints. Straighten your 
arms and legs when you stretch them, but 
don’t hold them tightly in a straight 
position. Your joints should always be 
slightly bent while stretching. 
Progressing 
You can progress in your stretching exercises. 
For example, as you become more fexible, try 
reaching farther, but not so far that it hurts. 
You can use the Flexibility Daily Record on page 
107 to keep track of your fexibility exercises. 


PAGE 84
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
82   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
Back of Leg  
Floor 
This exercise stretches the muscles in the back of your legs. If 
you’ve had hip or back surgery, talk with your doctor before 
trying this stretch. (See About Floor Exercises on page 80.) 
1. Lie on your back with left knee bent
and left foot fat on the foor.
2. Raise right leg, keeping knee slightly
bent.
3. Reach up and grasp right leg with
both hands. Keep head and shoulders
fat on the foor.
4. Gently pull right leg toward your
body until you feel a stretch in the
back of your leg.
5. Hold position for 10-30 seconds.
6. Repeat at least 3-5 times.
7. Repeat at least 3-5 times with left leg.



PAGE 90
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
88   EXERCISE & PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
Calf 
Because many people have tight calf muscles, it’s important 
to stretch them. 
1. Stand facing a wall slightly farther
than arm’s length from the wall, feet
shoulder-width apart.
2. Put your palms fat against the wall
at shoulder height and shoulder-width
apart.
3. Step forward with right leg and bend
right knee. Keeping both feet fat on the
foor, bend left knee slightly until you
feel a stretch in your left calf muscle.
It shouldn’t feel uncomfortable. If you
don’t feel a stretch, bend your right
knee until you do.
4. Hold position for 10-30 seconds, and
then return to starting position.
5. Repeat with left leg.
6. Continue alternating legs for at least
3-5 times on each leg.


